{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f2\froman\fprq1\fcharset128 MS Mincho;}{\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\stylesheet{ Normal;}{\s1 heading 1;}{\s2 heading 2;}{\s3 heading 3;}{\s4 heading 4;}}
\viewkind4\uc1\pard\f0\fs20\par
\pard\keepn\s2\b\f1\fs24 THE BICENTENNIAL MAN\par
\pard\b0\f0\fs20 and Other Stories\par
\par
\pard\keepn\s3\qr\b\f1\fs24 Isaac Asimov\par
\pard\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\keepn\s3\qc\b\f1\fs24 Contents\par
\pard\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\tqr\tldot\tx8630\cf1\lang1024\ul\fs24 The Prime of Life\cf0\ulnone\tab 2\par
\cf1\ul Feminine Intuition\cf0\ulnone\tab 4\par
\cf1\ul Waterclap\cf0\ulnone\tab 16\par
\cf1\ul That Thou Art Mindful of Him\cf0\ulnone\tab 33\par
\cf1\ul Stranger in Paradise\cf0\ulnone\tab 46\par
\cf1\ul The life and Times of Multivac\cf0\ulnone\tab 60\par
\cf1\ul The Winnowing\cf0\ulnone\tab 67\par
\cf1\ul The Bicentennial Man\cf0\ulnone\tab 72\par
\cf1\ul Marching In\cf0\ulnone\tab 92\par
\cf1\ul Old-fashioned\cf0\ulnone\tab 96\par
\cf1\ul The Tercentenary Incident\cf0\ulnone\tab 101\par
\cf1\ul Birth of a Notion\cf0\ulnone\tab 109\par
\pard\lang1033\fs20\par
\par
\i Dedicated to:\par
Judy-Lynn del Rey,\par
\pard\keepn\s4 And the swath she is cutting in our field\par
\pard\i0\par
\par
Here I am with another collection of science fiction stories, and I sit here and think, with more than a little astonishment, that I have been writing and publishing science fiction now for just three-eighths of a century. This isn\rquote t bad for someone who only admits to being in his late youth-or a little over thirty, if pinned down. \par
\tab It seems longer than that, I imagine, to most people who have tried to follow me from book to book and from field to field. As the flood of words continues year after year with no visible signs of letting up, the most peculiar misapprehensions naturally arise. \par
\tab Just a few weeks ago, for instance, I was at a librarian\rquote s convention signing books, and some of the kindly remarks I received were: \par
\tab\ldblquote I can\rquote t believe you\rquote re still alive!\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But how can you possibly look so young?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Are you really only one person?\rdblquote  \par
\tab It goes even beyond that. In a review of one of my books [\fs18 ASIMOV ON CHEMISTRY (Doubleday, 1974), and it was a very favorable review.\fs20 ]  in the December 1975 \i Scientific American, \i0 I was described as: \ldblquote Once a Boston biochemist, now label and linchpin of a New York corporate authorship--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Dear me! \i Corporate \i0 authorship? Merely the linchpin and label? \par
\tab It\rquote s not so. I\rquote m sorry, if my copious output makes it seem impossible, but I\rquote m alive, I\rquote m young, and I\rquote m only one person. \par
\tab In fact, I\rquote m an absolutely one-man operation. I have no assistants of any kind. I have no agent, no business manager, no research aides, no secretary, no stenographer. I do all my own typing, all my own proofreading, all my own indexing, all my own research, all my own letter writing, all my own telephone answering. \par
\tab I like it that way. Since I don\rquote t have to deal with other people, I can concentrate more properly on my work, and get more done. \par
\tab I was already worrying about this misapprehension concerning myself ten years ago. At that time, \i The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction \i0 ( commonly known as \i F \i0 & \i SF) \i0 was planning a special Isaac Asimov issue for October 1966. I was asked for a new story to be included and I obliged [\fs18 That story was THE KEY, and it appears in my collection ASIMOV\rquote S MYSTERIES (Doubleday, 1968). \fs20 ], but I also wrote a short poem on my own initiative. \par
\tab That poem appeared in the special issue and it has never appeared anywhere else-until now. I\rquote m going to include it here because it\rquote s appropriate to my thesis. Then, too, seven years after the poem appeared, I recited it to a charming maiden, who, without any sign of mental effort, immediately suggested a change that was so inevitable, and so great an improvement, that I have to get the poem into print again in order to make that change. \par
\tab I originally called the poem I\rquote M IN THE PRIME OF LIFE, YOU ROTTEN KID! Edward L. Ferman, editor of \i F \i0 & \i SF, \i0 shortened that to THE PRIME OF LIFE. I like the longer version much better, but I decided it would look odd on the contents page, so I\rquote m keeping the shorter version. (Heck!) \par
\par
\tab\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 The Prime of Life \par
\pard\kerning0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\pard\fi-288\li288 It was, in truth, an eager youth \line Who halted me one day. \i\par
\i0 He gazed in bliss at me, and this\line Is what he had to say;\par
\pard\par
\pard\fi-288\li288\ldblquote Why, mazel tov, it\rquote s Asimov,\line A blessing on your head!\par
For many a year, I\rquote ve lived in fear\line That you were long since dead. \par
\pard\par
\pard\fi-288\li288 Or if alive, one fifty-five \line Cold years had passed you by, \par
And left you weak, with poor physique, \line Thin hair and rheumy eye. \par
\pard\par
\pard\fi-288\li288 For sure enough, I\rquote ve read your stuff \line Since I was but a lad \par
And couldn\rquote t spell or hardly tell \line The good yarns from the bad. \par
\par
My father, too, was reading you \line Before he met my Ma. \par
For you he yearned, once he had learned \line About you from \i his\i0  Pa. \par
\par
Since time began, you wondrous man, \line My ancestors did love \par
That s.f. dean and writing machine \line The aged Asimov.\rdblquote  \par
\pard\par
\pard\fi-288\li288 I\rquote d had my fill. I said, \ldblquote Be still!\line I\rquote ve kept my old-time spark.\par
My step is light, my eye is bright, \line My hair is thick and dark.\rdblquote\par
\pard\par
\pard\fi-288\li288 His smile, in brief, spelled disbelief, \line So this is what I did;\par
I scowled, you know, and with one blow,\line I killed that rotten kid. \par
\pard\par
\tab The change I mentioned occurs in the first line of the second stanza. I had it read, originally, \ldblquote Why, stars above, it\rquote s Asimov,\rdblquote  but the aforementioned maiden saw at once it ought to be \ldblquote mazel tov.\rdblquote  This is a Hebrew phrase meaning \ldblquote good fortune\rdblquote  and it is used by Jews as a joyful greeting on jubilant occasions--as a meeting with me should surely be. . \par
\tab Ten years have passed since I wrote the poem and, of course, the impression of incredible age which I leave among those who know me only from my writings is now even stronger. When this poem was written, I had published a mere 66 books, and now, ten years later, the score stands at 175, so that it\rquote s been a decade of constant mental conflagration. \par
\tab Just the same, I\rquote ve kept my old-time spark even yet. My step is still light and my eye is still bright. What\rquote s more, I\rquote m as suave in my conversations with young women as I have ever been (which is very suave indeed). That bit about my hair being \ldblquote thick and dark\rdblquote  must be modified, however. There is no danger of baldness but, oh me, I am turning gray. In recent years, I have grown a generous pair of fluffy sideburns, and they are almost white. \par
\tab And now that you know the worst about me, let\rquote s go on to the stories themselves or, rather (for you are not quite through with me), to my introductory comments to the first story. \par
\tab\par
\b\par
\b0 The beginning of FEMININE INTUITION is tied up with Judy-Lynn Benjamin, whom I met at the World Science Fiction Convention in New York City in 1967. Judy-Lynn has to be seen to be believed-an incredibly intelligent, quick-witted, hard-driving woman who seems to be burning constantly with a bright radioactive glow. \par
\tab She was managing editor of \i Galaxy \i0 in those days. \par
\tab On March 21, 1971, she married that lovable old curmudgeon Lester del Rey, and knocked off all his rough edges in two seconds flat. At present, as Judy-Lynn del Rey, she is a senior editor at Ballantine Books and is generally recognized (especially by me) as one of the top editors in the business. [\fs18 You may have noticed that this book is dedicated to her.\fs20 ]\par
\tab Back in 1968, when Judy-Lynn was still at \i Galaxy, \i0 we were sitting in a bar in a New York hotel and she introduced me, I remember, to something called a \ldblquote grasshopper.\rdblquote  I told her I didn\rquote t drink because I had no capacity for alcohol, but she said I would like this one, and the trouble is I did. \par
\tab It\rquote s a green cocktail with creme de menthe, and cream, and who knows what else in it, and it is delicious. I only had one on this occasion, so I merely graduated to a slightly higher than normal level of the loud bonhomie that usually characterizes me and was still sober enough to talk business. [\fs18 A year or so later during the course of a science fiction convention, Judy-Lynn persuaded me to have \i two \i0 grasshoppers and I was instantly reduced to a kind of wild drunken merriment, and since then no one lets me have grasshoppers any more. Just\i  \i0 as well!\fs20 ]\par
\tab Judy-Lynn suggested I write a story about a \i female \i0 robot. Well, of course, my robots are sexually neutral, but they all have masculine names and I treat them all as males. The turnabout suggestion was good. \par
\tab I said, \ldblquote Gee, that\rquote s an interesting idea,\rdblquote  and was awfully pleased, because Ed Ferman had asked me for a story with which to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of \i Fantasy and Science Fiction \i0 and I had agreed, but, at the moment, did not have an idea in my head. \par
\tab On February 8, 1969, in line with the suggestion, I began FEMININE INTUITION. When it was done, Ed took it and the story was indeed included in the October 1969 \i Fantasy and Science Fiction, \i0 the twentieth-anniversary issue. It appeared as the lead novelette, too. \par
\tab Between the time I sold it, however, and the time it appeared, Judy-Lynn said casually to me one day, \ldblquote Did you ever do anything about my idea that you write a story about a female robot?\rdblquote  \par
\tab I said enthusiastically, \ldblquote Yes, I did, Judy-Lynn, and Ed Ferman is going to publish it. Thanks for the suggestion.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Judy-Lynn\rquote s eyes opened wide and she said in a very dangerous voice, \ldblquote Stories based on my ideas go to \i me, \i0 you dummy. You don\rquote t sell them to the competition.\rdblquote  \par
\tab She went on to expound on that theme for about half an hour and my attempts to explain that Ed had asked me for a story \i before \i0 the time of the suggestion and that she had never quite made it clear that she wanted the story for herself were brushed aside with scorn. \par
\tab Anyway, Judy-Lynn, here\rquote s the story again, and I\rquote m freely admitting that the suggestion of a female robot was yours. Does that make everything all right? (No, I didn\rquote t think so.) \par
\tab\par
\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 Feminine Intuition \par
\pard\kerning0\b0\f0\fs20\tab\par
\i The Three Laws \i0 of \i Robotics: \par
1. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm. \par
2. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the First Law. \par
3. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law.\par
\tab\i0\par
\tab For the first time in the history of United States Robots and Mechanical Men Corporation, a robot had been destroyed through accident on Earth itself. \par
\tab No one was to blame. The air vehicle had been demolished in mid-air and an unbelieving investigating committee was wondering whether they really dared announce the evidence that it had been hit by a meteorite. Nothing else could have been fast enough to prevent automatic avoidance; nothing else could have done the damage short of a nuclear blast and that was out of the question. \par
\tab Tie that in with a report of a flash in the night sky just before the vehicle had exploded--and from Flagstaff Observatory, not from an amateur--and the location of a sizable and distinctly meteoric bit of iron freshly gouged into the ground a mile from the site and what other conclusion could be arrived at? \par
\tab Still, nothing like that had ever happened before and calculations of the odds against it yielded monstrous figures. Yet even colossal improbabilities can happen sometimes. \par
\tab At the offices of United States Robots, the hows and whys of it were secondary. The real point was that a robot had been destroyed. \par
\tab That, in itself, was distressing. \par
\tab The fact that JN-5 had been a prototype, the first, after four earlier attempts, to have been placed in the field, was even more distressing. \par
\tab The fact that JN-5 was a radically new type of robot, quite different from anything ever built before, was abysmally distressing. \par
\tab The fact that JN-5 had apparently accomplished something before its destruction that was incalculably important and that that accomplishment might now be forever gone, placed the distress utterly beyond words. \par
\tab It\b  \b0 seemed scarcely worth mentioning that, along with the robot, the Chief Robopsychologist of United States Robots had also died. \par
\tab Clinton Madarian had joined the firm ten years before. For five of those years, he had worked uncomplainingly under the grumpy supervision of Susan Calvin. \par
\tab Madarian\rquote s brilliance was quite obvious and Susan Calvin had quietly promoted him over the heads of older men. She wouldn\rquote t, in any case, have deigned to give her reasons for this to Research Director Peter Bogert, but as it happened, no reasons were needed. Or, rather, they were obvious. \par
\tab Madarian was utterly the reverse of the renowned Dr. Calvin in several very noticeable ways. He was not quite as overweight as his distinct double chin made him appear to be, but even so he was overpowering in his presence, where Susan had gone nearly unnoticed. Madarian\rquote s massive face, his shock of glistening red-brown hair, his ruddy complexion and booming voice, his loud laugh, and most of all, his irrepressible self-confidence and his eager way of announcing his successes, made everyone else in the room feel there was a shortage of space. \par
\tab When Susan Calvin finally retired (refusing, in advance, any cooperation with respect to any testimonial dinner that might be planned in her honor, with so firm a manner that no announcement of the retirement was even made to the news services) Madarian took her place. \par
\tab He had been in his new post exactly one day when he initiated the JN project. \par
\tab It had meant the largest commitment of funds to one project that United States Robots had ever had to weigh, but that was something which Madarian dismissed with a genial wave of the hand. \par
\tab\ldblquote Worth every penny of it, Peter,\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote And I expect you to convince the Board of Directors of that.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Give me reasons,\rdblquote  said Bogert, wondering if Madarian would. Susan Calvin had never given reasons. \par
\tab But Madarian said, \ldblquote Sure,\rdblquote  and settled himself easily into the large armchair in the Director\rquote s office. \par
\tab Bogert watched the other with something that was almost awe. His own once-black hair was almost white now and within the decade he would follow Susan into retirement. That would mean the end of the original team that had built United States Robots into a globe-girdling firm that was a rival of the national governments in complexity and importance. Somehow neither he nor those who had gone before him ever quite grasped the enormous expansion of the firm. \par
\tab But this was a new generation. The new men were at ease with the Colossus\rdblquote  They lacked the touch of wonder that would have them tiptoeing in disbelief. So they moved ahead, and that was good. \par
\tab Madarian said, \ldblquote I propose to begin the construction of robots without constraint.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Without the Three Laws? Surely--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No, Peter. Are those the only constraints you can think of? Hell, you contributed to the design of the early positronic brains. Do I have to tell you that, quite aside from the Three Laws, there isn\rquote t a pathway in those brains that isn\rquote t carefully designed and fixed? We have robots planned for specific tasks, implanted with specific abilities.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And you propose--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That at every level below the Three Laws, the paths be made open-ended. It\rquote s not difficult.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert said dryly, \ldblquote It\rquote s not difficult, indeed. Useless things are never difficult. The difficult thing is fixing the paths and making the robot useful.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But why is that difficult? Fixing the paths requires a great deal of effort because the Principle of Uncertainty is important in particles the mass of positrons and the uncertainty effect must be minimized. Yet why must it? If we arrange to have the Principle just sufficiently prominent to allow the crossing of paths unpredictably--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We have an unpredictable robot.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We have a \i creative \i0 robot,\rdblquote  said Madarian, with a trace of impatience. \ldblquote Peter, if there\rquote s anything a human brain has that a robotic brain has never had, it\rquote s the trace of unpredictability that comes from the effects of uncertainty at the subatomic level. I admit that this effect has never been demonstrated experimentally within the nervous system, but without that the human brain is not superior to the robotic brain in principle.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And you think that if you introduce the effect into the robotic brain, the human brain will become not superior to the robotic brain in principle.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That, \ldblquote  said Madarian, \ldblquote is exactly what I believe.\rdblquote  They went on for a long time after that. \par
\tab The Board of Directors clearly had no intention of being easily convinced. \par
\tab Scott Robertson, the largest shareholder in the firm, said, \ldblquote It\rquote s hard enough to manage the robot industry as it is, with public hostility to robots forever on the verge of breaking out into the open. If the public gets the idea that robots will be uncontrolled...Oh, don\rquote t tell me about the Three Laws. The average man won\rquote t believe the Three Laws will protect him if he as much as hears the word \lquote uncontrolled.\rquote  \ldblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then don\rquote t use it, \ldblquote  said Madarian. \ldblquote Call the robot--call it \lquote intuitive.\rquote  \ldblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote An intuitive robot, \ldblquote  someone muttered. \ldblquote A girl robot?\rdblquote  A smile made its way about the conference table. \par
\tab Madarian seized on that. \ldblquote All right. A girl robot. Our robots are sexless, of course, and so will this one be, but we always act as though they\rquote re males. We give them male pet names and call them he and him. Now this one, if we consider the nature of the mathematical structuring of the brain which I have proposed, would fall into the JN-coordinate system. The first robot would be JN-1, and I\rquote ve assumed that it would be called John-10....I\rquote m afraid that is the level of originality of the average roboticist. But why not call it Jane-1, damn it? If the public has to be let in on what we\rquote re doing, we\rquote re constructing a feminine robot with intuition.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson shook his head, \ldblquote What difference would that make? What you\rquote re saying is that you plan to remove the last barrier which, in principle, keeps the robotic brain inferior to the human brain. What do you suppose the public reaction will be to that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you plan to make that public?\rdblquote  said Madarian. He thought a bit and then said, \ldblquote Look. One thing the general public believes is that women are not as intelligent as men.\rdblquote  \par
\tab There was an instant apprehensive look on the face of more than one man at the table and a quick look up and down as though Susan Calvin were still in her accustomed seat. \par
\tab Madarian said, \ldblquote If we announce a female robot, it doesn\rquote t matter what she is. The public will automatically assume she is mentally backward. We just publicize the robot as Jane-1 and we don\rquote t have to say another word. We\rquote re safe.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Actually,\rdblquote  said Peter Bogert quietly, \ldblquote there\rquote s more to it than that. Madarian and I have gone over the mathematics carefully and the JN series, whether John or Jane, would be quite safe. They would be less complex and intellectually capable, in an orthodox sense, than many another series we have designed and constructed. There would only be the one added factor of, well, let\rquote s get into the habit of calling it \lquote intuition.\rquote  \ldblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Who knows what it would do?\rdblquote  muttered Robertson. \par
\tab\ldblquote Madarian has suggested one thing it can do. As you all know, the Space Jump has been developed in principle. It is possible for men to attain what is, in effect, hyper-speeds beyond that of light and to visit other stellar systems and return in negligible time--weeks at the most.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson said, \ldblquote That\rquote s not new to us. It couldn\rquote t have been done without robots.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Exactly, and it\rquote s not doing us any good because we can\rquote t use the hyper-speed drive except perhaps once as a demonstration, so that U. S. Robots gets little credit. The Space Jump is risky, it\rquote s fearfully prodigal of energy and therefore it\rquote s enormously expensive. If we were going to use it anyway, it would be nice if we could report the existence of a habitable planet. Call it a psychological need. Spend about twenty billion dollars on a single Space Jump and report nothing but scientific data and the public wants to know why their money was wasted. Report the existence of a habitable planet, and you\rquote re an interstellar Columbus and no one will worry about the money.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote So?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote So where are we going to find a habitable planet? Or put it this way--which star within reach of the Space Jump as presently developed, which of the three hundred thousand stars and star systems within three hundred light-years has the best chance of having a habitable planet? We\rquote ve got an enormous quantity of details on every star in our three-hundred-light-year neighborhood and a notion that almost every one has a planetary system. But which has a \i habitable \i0 planet? Which do we visit?...We don\rquote t know.\rdblquote  \par
\tab One of the directors said, \ldblquote How would this Jane robot help us?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian was about to answer that, but he gestured slightly to Bogert and Bogert understood. The Director would carry more weight. Bogert didn\rquote t particularly like the idea; if the JN series proved a fiasco, he was making himself prominent enough in connection with it to insure that the sticky fingers of blame would cling to him. On the other hand, retirement was not all that far off, and if it worked, he would go out in a blaze of glory. Maybe it was only Madarian\rquote s aura of confidence, but Bogert had honestly come to believe it would work. \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote It may well be that somewhere in the libraries of data we have on those stars, there are methods for estimating the probabilities of the presence of Earth-type habitable planets. All we need to do is understand the data properly, look at them in the appropriate creative manner, make the correct correlations. We haven\rquote t done it yet. Or if some astronomer has, he hasn\rquote t been smart enough to realize what he has. \par
\tab\ldblquote A JN-type robot could make correlations far more rapidly and far more precisely than a man could. In a day, it would make and discard as many correlations as a man could in ten years. Furthermore, it would work in truly random fashion, whereas a man would have a strong bias based on preconception and on what is already believed.\rdblquote  \par
\tab There was a considerable silence after that Finally Robertson said, \ldblquote But it\rquote s only a matter of probability, isn\rquote t it? Suppose this robot said, \lquote The highest-probability habitable-planet star within so-and-so light-years is Squidgee-17\rdblquote  or whatever, and we go there and find that a probability is only a probability and that there are no habitable planets after all. Where does that leave us?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian struck in this time. \ldblquote We still win. We know how the robot came to the conclusion because it--she--will tell us. It might well help us gain enormous insight into astronomical detail and make the whole thing worthwhile even if we don\rquote t make the Space Jump at all. Besides, we can then work out the five most probable sites of planets and the probability that one of the five has a habitable planet may then be better than 0.95. It would be almost sure--\rdblquote  \par
\tab They went on for a long time after that. \par
\tab The funds granted were quite insufficient, but Madarian counted on the habit of throwing good money after bad. With two hundred million about to be lost irrevocably when another hundred million could save everything, the other hundred million would surely be voted. \par
\tab Jane-1 was finally built and put on display. Peter Bogert studied it --her--gravely. He said, \ldblquote Why the narrow waist? Surely that introduces a mechanical weakness?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian chuckled. \ldblquote Listen, if we\rquote re going to call her Jane, there\rquote s no point in making her look like Tarzan.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert shook his head. \ldblquote Don\rquote t like it. You\rquote ll be bulging her higher up to give the appearance of breasts next, and that\rquote s a rotten idea. If women start getting the notion that robots may look like women, I can tell you exactly the kind of perverse notions they\rquote ll get, and you\rquote ll \i really \i0 have hostility on their part.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian said, \ldblquote Maybe you\rquote re right at that. No woman wants to feel replaceable by something with none of her faults. Okay.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Jane-2 did not have the pinched waist. She was a somber robot which rarely moved and even more rarely spoke. \par
\tab Madarian had only occasionally come rushing to Bogert with items of news during her construction and that had been a sure sign that things were going poorly. Madarian\rquote s ebullience under success was overpowering. He would not hesitate to invade Bogert\rquote s bedroom at 3 A.M. with a hot-flash item rather than wait for the morning. Bogert was sure of that. \par
\tab Now Madarian seemed subdued, his usually florid expression nearly pale, his round cheeks somehow pinched. Bogert said, with a feeling of certainty, \ldblquote She won\rquote t talk.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh, she talks.\rdblquote  Madarian sat down heavily and chewed at his lower lip. \ldblquote Sometimes, anyway,\rdblquote  he said. \par
\tab Bogert rose and circled the robot. \ldblquote And when she talks, she makes no sense, I suppose. Well, if she doesn\rquote t talk, she\rquote s no female, is she?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian tried a weak smile for size and abandoned it. He said, \ldblquote The brain, in isolation, checked out.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I know,\rdblquote  said Bogert. \ldblquote But once that brain was put in charge of the physical apparatus of the robot, it was necessarily modified, of course.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Of course,\rdblquote  agreed Bogert unhelpfully. \ldblquote But unpredictably and frustratingly. The trouble is that when you\rquote re dealing with n-dimensional calculus of uncertainty, things are--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Uncertain?\rdblquote  said Bogert. His own reaction was surprising him. The company investment was already most sizable and almost two years had elapsed, yet the results were, to put it politely, disappointing. Still, he found himself jabbing at Madarian and finding himself amused in the process. \par
\tab Almost furtively, Bogert wondered if it weren\rquote t the absent Susan Calvin he was jabbing at. Madarian was so much more ebullient and effusive than Susan could ever possibly be--when things were going well. He was also far more vulnerably in the dumps when things weren\rquote t going well, and it was precisely under pressure that Susan never cracked. The target that Madarian made could be a neatly punctured bull\rquote s-eye as recompense for the target Susan had never allowed herself to be. \par
\tab Madarian did not react to Bogert\rquote s last remark any more than Susan Calvin would have done; not out of contempt, which would have been Susan\rquote s reaction, but because he did not hear it \par
\tab He said argumentatively, \ldblquote The trouble is the matter of recognition. We have Jane-2 correlating magnificently. She can correlate on any subject, but once she\rquote s done so, she can\rquote t recognize a valuable result from a valueless one. It\rquote s not an easy problem, judging how to program a robot to tell a significant correlation when you don\rquote t know what correlations she will be making.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I presume you\rquote ve thought of lowering the potential at the W-21 diode junction and sparking across the--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, no, no, no--\rdblquote  Madarian faded off into a whispering diminuendo. \ldblquote You can\rquote t just have it spew out everything. We can do that for ourselves. The point is to have it recognize the crucial correlation and draw the conclusion. Once that is done, you see, a Jane robot would snap out an answer by intuition. It would be something we couldn\rquote t get ourselves except by the oddest kind of luck.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It seems to me,\rdblquote  said Bogert dryly, \ldblquote that if you had a robot like that, you would have her do routinely what, among human beings, only the occasional genius is capable of doing.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian nodded vigorously. \ldblquote Exactly, Peter. I\rquote d have said so myself if I weren\rquote t afraid of frightening off the execs. Please don\rquote t repeat that in their hearing.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you really want a robot genius?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What are words? I\rquote m trying to get a robot with the capacity to make random correlations at enormous speeds, together with a key-significance high-recognition quotient. And I\rquote m trying to put \i those \i0 words into positronic field equations. I thought I had it, too, but I don\rquote t. Not yet.\rdblquote  \par
\tab He looked at Jane-2 discontentedly and said, \ldblquote What\rquote s the best significance you have, Jane?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Jane-2\rquote s head turned to look at Madarian but she made no sound, and Madarian whispered with resignation, \ldblquote She\rquote s running that into the correlation banks.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Jane-2 spoke tonelessly at last. \ldblquote I\rquote m not sure.\rdblquote  It was the first sound she had made. \par
\tab Madarian\rquote s eyes rolled upward. \ldblquote She\rquote s doing the equivalent of setting up equations with indeterminate solutions.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I gathered that,\rdblquote  said Bogert. \ldblquote Listen, Madarian, can you go anywhere at this point, or do we pull out now and cut our losses at half a billion?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh, I\rquote ll get it, \ldblquote  muttered Madarian. \par
\tab Jane-3 wasn\rquote t it. She was never as much as activated and Madarian was in a rage. \par
\tab It was human error. His own fault, if one wanted to be entirely accurate. Yet though Madarian was utterly humiliated, others remained quiet. Let he who has never made an error in the fearsomely intricate mathematics of the positronic brain fill out the first memo of correction. \par
\tab Nearly a year passed before Jane-4 was ready. Madarian was ebullient again. \ldblquote She does it,\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote She\rquote s got a good high-recognition quotient.\rdblquote  \par
\tab He was confident enough to place her on display before the Board and have her solve problems. Not mathematical problems; any robot could do that; but problems where the terms were deliberately misleading without being actually inaccurate. \par
\tab Bogert said afterward, \ldblquote That doesn\rquote t take much, really.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Of course not. It\rquote s elementary for Jane-4 but I had to show them something, didn\rquote t I?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you know how much we\rquote ve spent so far?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Come on, Peter, don\rquote t give me that. Do you know how much we\rquote ve got back? These things don\rquote t go on in a vacuum, you know. I\rquote ve had over three years of hell over this, if you want to know, but I\rquote ve worked out new techniques of calculation that will save us a minimum of fifty thousand dollars on every new type of positronic brain we design, from now on in forever. Right?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Well me no wells. It\rquote s so. And it\rquote s my personal feeling that n-dimensional calculus of uncertainty can have any number of other applications if we have the ingenuity to find them, and my Jane robots \i will \i0 find them. Once I\rquote ve got exactly what I want, the new JN series will pay for itself inside of five years, even if we triple what we\rquote ve invested so far.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What do you mean by \lquote exactly what you want\rquote ? What\rquote s wrong with Jane-4?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Nothing. Or nothing much. She\rquote s on the track, but she can be improved and I intend to do so. I thought I knew where I was going when I designed her. Now I\rquote ve tested her and I \i know \i0 where I\rquote m going. I intend to get there.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\tab Jane-5 was it. It took Madarian well over a year to produce her and there he had no reservations; he was utterly confident. \par
\tab Jane-5 was shorter than the average robot, slimmer. Without being a female caricature as Jane-1 had been, she managed to possess an air of femininity about herself despite the absence of a single clearly feminine feature. \par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s the way she\rquote s standing,\rdblquote  said Bogert. Her arms were held gracefully and somehow the torso managed to give the impression of curving slightly when she turned. \par
\tab Madarian said, \ldblquote Listen to her....How do you feel, Jane?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In excellent health, thank you,\rdblquote  said Jane-5, and the voice was precisely that of a woman; it was a sweet and almost disturbing contralto. \par
\tab\ldblquote Why did you do that, Clinton?\rdblquote  said Peter, startled and beginning to frown. \par
\tab\ldblquote Psychologically important,\rdblquote  said Madarian. \ldblquote I want people to think of her as a woman; to treat her as a woman; to \i explain.\rdblquote  \par
\i0\tab\ldblquote What people?\rdblquote  Madarian put his hands in his pockets and stared thoughtfully at Bogert. \ldblquote I would like to have arrangements made for Jane and myself to go to flagstaff.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert couldn\rquote t help but note that Madarian didn\rquote t say Jane-5. He made use of no number this time. She was \i the \i0 Jane. He said doubtfully, \ldblquote To flagstaff? Why?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Because that\rquote s the world center for general planetology, isn\rquote t it? It\rquote s where they\rquote re studying the stars and trying to calculate the probability of habitable planets, isn\rquote t it?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I know that, but it\rquote s on Earth.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Well, and I surely know that.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Robotic movements on Earth are strictly controlled. And there\rquote s no need for it. Bring a library of books on general planetology here and let Jane absorb them.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No! Peter, will you get it through your head that Jane isn\rquote t the ordinary logical robot; she\rquote s intuitive.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote So?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote So how can we tell what she needs, what she can use, what will set her off? We can use any metal model in the factory to read books; that\rquote s frozen data and out of date besides. Jane must have living information; she must have tones of voice, she must have side issues; she must have total irrelevancies even. How the devil do we know what or when something will go click-click inside her and fall into a pattern? If we knew, we wouldn\rquote t need her at all, would we?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert began to feel harassed. He said, \ldblquote Then bring the men here, the general planetologists.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Here won\rquote t be any good. They\rquote ll be out of their element. They won\rquote t react naturally. I want Jane to watch them at work; I want her to see their instruments, their offices, their desks, everything about them that she can. I want you to arrange to have her transported to flagstaff. And I\rquote d really like not to discuss it any further.\rdblquote  \par
\tab For a moment he almost sounded like Susan. Bogert winced, and said, \ldblquote It\rquote s complicated making such an arrangement. Transporting an experimental robot--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Jane isn\rquote t experimental. She\rquote s the fifth of the series.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The other four weren\rquote t really working models.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian lifted his hands in helpless frustration. \ldblquote Who\rquote s forcing you to tell the government that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m not worried about the government. It can be made to understand special cases. It\rquote s public opinion. We\rquote ve come a long way in fifty years and I don\rquote t propose to be set back twenty-five of them by having you lose control of a--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I won\rquote t lose control. You\rquote re making foolish remarks. Look! U. S. Robots can afford a private plane. We can land quietly at the nearest commercial airport and be lost in hundreds of similar landings. We can arrange to have a large ground car with an enclosed body meet us and take us to Flagstaff. Jane will be crated and it will be obvious that some piece of thoroughly non-robotic equipment is being transported to the labs. We won\rquote t get a second look from anyone. The men at Flagstaff will be alerted and will be told the exact purpose of the visit. They will have every motive to cooperate and to prevent a leak.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert pondered. \ldblquote The risky part will be the plane and the ground car. If anything happens to the crate--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Nothing will.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We might get away with it if Jane is deactivated during transport. Then even if someone finds out she\rquote s inside--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, Peter. That can\rquote t be done. Uh-uh. Not Jane-5. Look, she\rquote s been free-associating since she was activated. The information she possesses can be put into freeze during deactivation but the free associations never. No, sir, she can\rquote t ever be deactivated.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But, then, if somehow it is discovered that we are transporting an activated robot--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It won\rquote t be found out.\rdblquote  Madarian remained firm and the plane eventually took off. It was a late-model automatic Computo-jet, but it carried a human pilot--one of U. S. Robots\rquote  own employees--as backup. The crate containing Jane arrived at the airport safely, was transferred to the ground car, and reached the Research Laboratories at Flagstaff without incident. \par
\tab Peter Bogert received his first call from Madarian not more than an hour after the latter\rquote s arrival at Flagstaff. Madarian was ecstatic and, characteristically, could not wait to report. \par
\tab The message arrived by tubed laser beam, shielded, scrambled, and ordinarily impenetrable, but Bogert felt exasperated. He knew it could be penetrated if someone with enough technological ability--the government, for example--was determined to do so. The only real safety lay in the fact that the government had no reason to try. At least Bogert hoped so. \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote For God\rquote s sake, do you have to call?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian ignored him entirely. He burbled, \ldblquote It was an inspiration. Sheer genius, I tell you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab For a while, Bogert stared at the receiver. Then he shouted incredulously, \ldblquote You mean you\rquote ve got the answer? Already?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, no! Give us time, damn it. I mean the matter of her voice was an inspiration. Listen, after we were chauffeured from the airport to the main administration building at Flagstaff, we uncrated Jane and she stepped out of the box. When that happened, every man in the place stepped back. Scared! Nitwits! If even scientists can\rquote t understand the significance of the Laws of Robotics, what can we expect of the average untrained individual? For a minute there I thought: This will all be useless. They won\rquote t talk. They\rquote ll be keying themselves for a quick break in case she goes berserk and they\rquote ll be able to think of nothing else.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, then, what are you getting at?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote So then she greeted them routinely. She said, \lquote Good afternoon, gentlemen. I am so glad to meet you.\rquote  And it came out in this beautiful contralto....That was it. One man straightened his tie, and another ran his fingers through his hair. What really got me was that the oldest guy in the place actually checked his fly to make sure it was zipped. They\rquote re all crazy about her now. All they needed was the voice. She isn\rquote t a robot any more; she\rquote s a girl.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You mean they\rquote re talking to her?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote\i Are \i0 they talking to her! I should say so. I should have programmed her for sexy intonations. They\rquote d be asking her for dates right now if I had. Talk about conditioned reflex. Listen, men respond to voices. At the most intimate moments, are they looking? It\rquote s the voice in your ear--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, Clinton, I seem to remember. Where\rquote s Jane now?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote With them. They won\rquote t let go of her.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Damn! Get in there with her. Don\rquote t let her out of your sight, man.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian\rquote s calls thereafter, during his ten-day stay at Flagstaff, were not very frequent and became progressively less exalted. \par
\tab Jane was listening carefully, he reported, and occasionally she responded. She remained popular. She was given entry everywhere. But there were no results. \par
\tab Bogert said, \ldblquote Nothing at all?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Madarian was at once defensive. \ldblquote You can\rquote t say nothing at all. It\rquote s impossible to say nothing at all with an intuitive robot. You don\rquote t know what might not be going on inside her. This morning she asked Jensen what he had for breakfast.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Rossiter Jensen the astrophysicist?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, of course. As it turned out, he didn\rquote t have breakfast that morning. Well, a cup of coffee.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote So Jane\rquote s learning to make small talk. That scarcely makes up for the expense.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Oh, don\rquote t be a jackass. It wasn\rquote t small talk. Nothing is small talk for Jane. She asked because it had something to do with some sort of cross-correlation she was building in her mind.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What can it possibly--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How do I know? If I knew, I\rquote d be a Jane myself and you wouldn\rquote t need her. But it has to mean something. She\rquote s programmed for high motivation to obtain an answer to the question of a planet with optimum habitability/distance and--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then let me know when she\rquote s done that and not before. It\rquote s not really necessary for me to get a blow-by-blow description of possible correlations.\rdblquote  \par
\tab He didn\rquote t really expect to get notification of success. With each day, Bogert grew less sanguine, so that when the notification finally came, he wasn\rquote t ready. And it came at the very end. \par
\tab That last time, when Madarian\rquote s climactic message came, it came in what was almost a whisper. Exaltation had come complete circle and Madarian was awed into quiet. \par
\tab\ldblquote She did it,\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote She did it. After I all but gave up, too. After she had received everything in the place and most of it twice and three times over and never said a word that sounded like anything....I\rquote m on the plane now, returning. We\rquote ve just taken off.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert managed to get his breath. \ldblquote Don\rquote t play games, man. You have the \i answer? \i0 Say so, if you have. Say it plainly.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote She has the answer. She\rquote s given me the answer. She\rquote s given me the names of three stars within eighty light-years which, she says, have a sixty to ninety percent chance of possessing one habitable planet each. The probability that at least one has is 0.972. It\rquote s almost certain. And that\rquote s just the least of it. Once we get back, she can give us the exact line of reasoning that led her to the conclusion and I predict that the whole science of astrophysics and cosmology will--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Are you sure--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You think I\rquote m having hallucinations? I even have a witness. Poor guy jumped two feet when Jane suddenly began to reel out the answer in her gorgeous voice\rdblquote  \par
\tab And that was when the meteorite struck and in the thorough destruction of the plane that followed, Madarian and the pilot were reduced to gobbets of bloody flesh and no usable remnant of Jane was recovered. \par
\par
\tab The gloom at U. S. Robots had never been deeper. Robertson attempted to find consolation in the fact that the very completeness of the destruction had utterly hidden the illegalities of which the firm had been guilty. \par
\tab Peter shook his head and mourned. \ldblquote We\rquote ve lost the best chance U. S. Robots ever had of gaining an unbeatable public image; of overcoming the damned Frankenstein complex. What it would have meant for robots to have one of them work out the solution to the habitable-planet problem, after other robots had helped work out the Space Jump. Robots would have opened the galaxy to us. And if at the same time we could have driven scientific knowledge forward in a dozen different directions as we surely would have...Oh, God, there\rquote s no way of calculating the benefits to the human race, and to us of course.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson said, \ldblquote We could build other Janes, couldn\rquote t we? Even without Madarian?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Sure we could. But can we depend on the proper correlation again? Who knows how low--probability that final result was? What if Madarian had had a fantastic piece of beginner\rquote s luck? And then to have an even more fantastic piece of bad luck? A meteorite zeroing in...It\rquote s simply unbelievable--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson said in a hesitating whisper, \ldblquote It couldn\rquote t have been meant. I mean, if we weren\rquote t meant to know and if the meteorite was a judgment--from--\rdblquote  \par
\tab He faded off under Bogert\rquote s withering glare. Bogert said, \ldblquote It\rquote s not a dead loss, I suppose. Other Janes are bound to help us in some ways. And we can give other robots feminine voices, if that will help encourage public acceptance--though I wonder what the women would say. If we only knew what Jane-5 had said!\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In that last call, Madarian said there was a witness.\rdblquote  Bogert said, \ldblquote I know; I\rquote ve been thinking about that. Don\rquote t you suppose I\rquote ve been in touch with flagstaff? Nobody in the entire place heard Jane say anything that was out of the ordinary, anything that sounded like an answer to the habitable-planet problem, and certainly anyone there should have recognized the answer if it came --or at least recognized it as a possible answer.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Could Madarian have been lying? Or crazy? Could he have been trying to protect himself--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You mean he may have been trying to save his reputation by pretending he had the answer and then gimmick Jane so she couldn\rquote t talk and say, \lquote Oh, sorry, something happened accidentally. Oh, darn!\rquote  I won\rquote t accept that for a minute. You might as well suppose he had arranged the meteorite.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then what do we do?\rdblquote  Bogert said heavily, \ldblquote Turn back to flagstaff. The answer \i must \i0 be there. I\rquote ve got to dig deeper, that\rquote s all. I\rquote m going there and I\rquote m taking a couple of the men in Madarian\rquote s department. We\rquote ve got to go through that place top to bottom and end to end.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But, you know, even if there were a witness and he had heard, what good would it do, now that we don\rquote t have Jane to explain the process?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Every little something is useful. Jane gave the names of the stars; the catalogue numbers probably--none of the named stars has a chance. If\b  \b0 someone can remember her saying that and actually remember the catalogue number, or have heard it clearly enough to allow it to be recovered by Psycho-probe if he lacked the conscious memory--then we\rquote ll have something. Given the results at the end, and the data fed Jane at the beginning, we might be able to reconstruct the line of reasoning; we might recover the intuition. If\b  \b0 that is done, we\rquote ve saved the game--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert was back after three days, silent and thoroughly depressed. When Robertson inquired anxiously as to results, he shook his head. \ldblquote Nothing!\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Nothing?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Absolutely nothing. I spoke with every man in flagstaff--every scientist, every technician, every student--that had had anything to do with Jane; everyone that had as much as seen her. The number wasn\rquote t great; I\rquote ll give Madarian credit for that much discretion. He only allowed those to see her who might conceivably have had planetological knowledge to feed her. There were twenty-three men altogether who had seen Jane and of those only twelve had spoken to her more than casually. \par
\tab\ldblquote I went over and over all that Jane had said. They remembered everything quite well. They\rquote re keen men engaged in a crucial experiment involving their specialty, so they had every motivation to remember. And they were dealing with a talking robot, something that was startling enough, and one that talked like a TV actress. They couldn\rquote t forget.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson said, \ldblquote Maybe a Psycho-probe--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote If one of them had the vaguest thought that something had happened, I would screw out his consent to Probing. But there\rquote s nothing to leave room for an excuse, and to Probe two dozen men who make their living from their brains can\rquote t be done. Honestly, it wouldn\rquote t help. If Jane had mentioned three stars and said they had habitable planets, it would have been like setting up sky rockets in their brains. How could anyone of them forget?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then maybe one of them is lying,\rdblquote  said Robertson grimly. \ldblquote He wants the information for his own use; to get the credit himself later.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What good would that do him?\rdblquote  said Bogert. \ldblquote The whole establishment knows exactly why Madarian and Jane were there in the first place. They know why I came there in the second. If at any time in the future any man now at Flagstaff suddenly comes up with a habitable-planet theory that is startlingly new and different, yet valid, every other man at Flagstaff and every man at U. S. Robots will know at once that he had stolen it. He\rquote d never get away with it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then Madarian himself was somehow mistaken.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t see how I can believe that either. Madarian had an irritating personality--all robopsychologists have irritating personalities, I think, which must be why they work with robots rather than with men--but he was no dummy. He \i couldn\rquote t \i0 be wrong in something like this.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then--\rdblquote  But Robertson had run out of possibilities. They had reached a blank wall and for some minutes each stared at it disconsolately. \par
\tab Finally Robertson stirred. \ldblquote Peter--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Well?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Let\rquote s ask Susan.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert stiffened. \ldblquote What!\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Let\rquote s ask Susan. Let\rquote s call her and ask her to come in.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Why? What can she possibly do?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t know. But she\rquote s a robopsychologist, too, and she might understand Madarian better than we do. Besides, she--Oh, hell, she always had more brains than any of us.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote She\rquote s nearly eighty.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And you\rquote re seventy. What about it?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert sighed. Had her abrasive tongue lost any of its rasp in the years of her retirement? He said, \ldblquote Well, I\rquote ll ask her.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Susan Calvin entered Bogert\rquote s office with a slow look around before her eyes fixed themselves on the Research Director. She had aged a great deal since her retirement. Her hair was a fine white and her face seemed to have crumpled. She had grown so frail as to be almost transparent and only her eyes, piercing and uncompromising, seemed to remain of all that had been. \par
\tab Bogert strode forward heartily, holding out his hand. \ldblquote Susan!\rdblquote  \par
\tab Susan Calvin took it, and said, \ldblquote You\rquote re looking reasonably well, Peter, for an old man. If I were you, I wouldn\rquote t wait till next year. Retire now and let the young men get to it....And Madarian is dead. Are you calling me in to take over my old job? Are you determined to keep the ancients till a year past actual physical death?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, no, Susan. I\rquote ve called you in--\rdblquote  He stopped. He did not, after all, have the faintest idea of how to start. \par
\tab But Susan read his mind now as easily as she always had. She seated herself with the caution born of stiffened joints and said, \ldblquote Peter, you\rquote ve called me in because you\rquote re in bad trouble. Otherwise you\rquote d sooner see me dead than within a mile of you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Come, Susan--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Don\rquote t waste time on pretty talk. I never had time to waste when I was forty and certainly not now. Madarian\rquote s death and your call to me are both unusual, so there must be a connection. Two unusual events without a connection is too low-probability to worry about. Begin at the beginning and don\rquote t worry about revealing yourself to be a fool. That was revealed to me long ago.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert cleared his throat miserably and began. She listened carefully, her withered hand lifting once in a while to stop him so that she might ask a question. \par
\tab She snorted at one point. \ldblquote Feminine intuition? Is that what you wanted the robot for? You men. Faced with a woman reaching a correct conclusion and unable to accept the fact that she is your equal or superior in intelligence, you invent something called feminine intuition.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh, yes, Susan, but let me continue--\rdblquote  \par
\tab He did. When she was told of Jane\rquote s contralto voice, she said, \ldblquote It is a difficult choice sometimes whether to feel revolted at the male sex or merely to dismiss them as contemptible.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert said, \ldblquote Well, let me go on--\rdblquote  \par
\tab When he was quite done, Susan said, \ldblquote May I have the private use of this office for an hour or two?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, but--\rdblquote  \par
\tab She said, \ldblquote I want to go over the various records--Jane\rquote s programming, Madarian\rquote s calls, your interviews at flagstaff. I presume I can use that beautiful new shielded laser-phone and your computer outlet if I wish.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, of course.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, then, get out of here, Peter.\rdblquote  \par
\tab It was not quite forty-five minutes when she hobbled to the door, opened it, and called for Bogert. \par
\tab When Bogert came, Robertson was with him. Both entered and Susan greeted the latter with an unenthusiastic \ldblquote Hello, Scott.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert tried desperately to gauge the results from Susan\rquote s face, but it was only the face of a grim old lady who had no intention of making anything easy for him. \par
\tab He said cautiously, \ldblquote Do you think there\rquote s anything you can do, Susan?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Beyond what I have already done? No! There\rquote s nothing more.\rdblquote  Bogert\rquote s lips set in chagrin, but Robertson said, \ldblquote What have you already done, Susan?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Susan said, \ldblquote I\rquote ve thought a little; something I can\rquote t seem to persuade anyone else to do. For one thing, I\rquote ve thought about Madarian. I knew him, you know. He had brains but he was a very irritating extrovert. I thought you would like him after me, Peter.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It was a change,\rdblquote  Bogert couldn\rquote t resist saying. \par
\tab\ldblquote And he was always running to you with results the very minute he had them, wasn\rquote t he?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, he was.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And yet,\rdblquote  said Susan, \ldblquote his last message, the one in which he said Jane had given him the answer, was sent from the plane. Why did he wait so long? Why didn\rquote t he call you while he was still at flagstaff, immediately after Jane had said whatever it was she said?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I suppose,\rdblquote  said Peter, \ldblquote that for once he wanted to check it thoroughly and--well, I don\rquote t know. It was the most important thing that had ever happened to him; he might for once have wanted to wait and be sure of himself.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote On the contrary; the more important it was, the less he would wait, surely. And if he could manage to wait, why not do it properly and wait till he was back at U. S. Robots so that he could check the results with all the computing equipment this firm could make available to him? In short, he waited too long from one point of view and not long enough from another.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson interrupted. \ldblquote Then you think he was up to some trickery--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Susan looked revolted. \ldblquote Scott, don\rquote t try to compete with Peter in making inane remarks. Let me continue....A second point concerns the witness. According to the records of that last call, Madarian said, \lquote Poor guy jumped two feet when Jane suddenly began to reel out the answer in her gorgeous voice.\rquote  In fact, it was the last thing he said. And the question is, then, why should the witness have jumped? Madarian had explained that all the men were crazy about that voice, and they had had ten days with the robot--with Jane. Why should the mere act of her speaking have startled them?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert said, \ldblquote I assumed it was astonishment at hearing Jane give an answer to a problem that has occupied the minds of planetologists for nearly a century.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But they were \i waiting \i0 for her to give that answer. That was why she was there. Besides, consider the way the sentence is worded. Madarian\rquote s statement makes it seem the witness was startled, not astonished, if you see the difference. What\rquote s more, that reaction came \lquote when Jane suddenly began\rquote --in other words, at the very start of the statement. To be astonished at the content of what Jane said would have required the witness to have listened awhile so that he might absorb it. Madarian would have said he had jumped two feet \i after \i0 he had heard Jane say thus-and-so. It would be \lquote after\rquote  not \lquote when\rquote  and the word \lquote suddenly\rquote  would not be included.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert said uneasily, \ldblquote I don\rquote t think you can refine matters down to the use or non-use of a word.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I can,\rdblquote  said Susan frostily, \ldblquote because I am a robopsychologist. And I can expect Madarian to do so, too, because \i he \i0 was a robopsychologist. We have to explain those two anomalies, then. The queer delay before Madarian\rquote s call and the queer reaction of the witness.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Can \i you \i0 explain them?\rdblquote  Asked Robertson. \ldblquote Of course,\rdblquote  said Susan, \ldblquote since I use a little simple logic. Madarian called with the news without delay, as he always did, or with as little delay as he could manage. If Jane had solved the problem at Flagstaff, he would certainly have called from Flagstaff. Since he called from the plane, she must clearly have solved the problem after he had left Flagstaff.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But then--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Let me finish. Let me finish. Was Madarian not taken from the airport to Flagstaff in a heavy, enclosed ground car? And Jane, in her crate, with him?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And presumably, Madarian and the crated Jane returned from Flagstaff to the airport in the same heavy, enclosed ground car. Am I right?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, of course!\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And they were not alone in the ground car, either. In one of his calls, Madarian said, \lquote We were chauffeured from the airport to the main administration building,\rquote  and I suppose I am right in concluding that if he was chauffeured, then that was because there was a chauffeur, a human driver, in the car.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Good God!\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The trouble with you, Peter, is that when you think of a witness to a planetological statement, you think of planetologists. You divide up human beings into categories, and despise and dismiss most. A robot cannot do that. The First Law says, \lquote A robot may not injure a \i human being \i0 or, through inaction, allow a \i human being \i0 to come to harm.\rquote  \i Any \i0 human being. That is the essence of the robotic view of life. A robot makes no distinction. To a robot, all men are truly equal, and to a robopsychologist who must perforce deal with men at the robotic level, all men are truly equal, too. \par
\tab\ldblquote It would not occur to Madarian to say a truck driver had heard the statement. To you a truck driver is not a scientist but is a mere animate adjunct of a truck, but to Madarian he was a man and a witness. Nothing more. Nothing less.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bogert shook his head in disbelief. \ldblquote But you are \i sure?\rdblquote\par
\i0\tab\ldblquote Of course I\rquote m sure. How else can you explain the other point; Madarian\rquote s remark about the startling of the witness? Jane was crated, wasn\rquote t she? But she was \i not\i0  deactivated. According to the records, Madarian was always adamant against ever deactivating an intuitive robot. Moreover, Jane-5, like any of the Janes, was extremely non-talkative. Probably it never occurred to Madarian to order her to remain quiet within the crate; and it was within the crate that the pattern finally fell into place. Naturally she began to talk. A beautiful contralto voice suddenly sounded from inside the crate. If you were the truck driver, what would you do at that point? Surely you\rquote d be startled. It\rquote s a wonder he didn\rquote t crash.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But if the truck driver was the witness, why didn\rquote t he come forward--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Why? Can he possibly know that anything crucial had happened, that what he heard was important? Besides, don\rquote t you suppose Madarian tipped him well and asked him not to say anything? Would you \i want \i0 the news to spread that an activated robot was being transported illegally over the Earth\rquote s surface.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, will he remember what was said?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Why not? It might seem to you, Peter, that a truck driver, one step above an ape in your view, can\rquote t remember. But truck drivers can have brains, too. The statements were most remarkable and the driver may well have remembered some. Even if he gets some of the letters and numbers wrong, we\rquote re dealing with a finite set, you know, the fifty-five hundred stars or star systems within eighty light-years or so--I haven\rquote t looked up the exact number. You can make the correct choices. And if needed, you will have every excuse to use the Psycho-probe--\rdblquote  \par
\tab The two men stared at her. Finally Bogert, afraid to believe, whispered, \ldblquote But how can you be \i sure?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\i0 For a moment, Susan was on the point of saying: Because I\rquote ve called Flagstaff, you fool, and because I spoke to the truck driver, and because he told me what he had heard, and because I\rquote ve checked with the computer at Flagstaff and got the only three stars that fit the information, and because I have those names in my pocket. \par
\tab But she didn\rquote t. Let him go through it all himself. Carefully, she rose to her feet, and said sardonically, \ldblquote How can I be sure?...Call it feminine intuition.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\par
\par
Do not fear, Gentle Readers, that my misunderstanding of Judy-Lynn\rquote s intentions destroyed a friendship. The Asimovs and the del Reys live less than a mile apart, and frequent each other often. Although Judy-Lynn never hesitates to bounce me off the nearest wall, we all are, have been, and will remain, the very best of friends. \par
\par
\b\par
\b0 Sometime in mid-1969, Doubleday called me up to ask if I would write a science fiction story that could serve as the basis of a movie. I didn\rquote t want to, because I don\rquote t like to get tangled up with the visual media directly. They\rquote ve got money, but that\rquote s all they\rquote ve got. But Doubleday pressed me and I don\rquote t like to refuse Doubleday. I agreed. \par
\tab Then eventually I had dinner with a very pleasant gentleman who was involved with the motion picture company and who wanted to discuss the story with me. \par
\tab He told me he wanted an undersea setting and that suited me. He then went on to describe with considerable enthusiasm the nature of the characters he wanted in the story, and the events he thought would be necessary. As he spoke, my spirits sank. The fact was that I didn\rquote t want the hero he described; I didn\rquote t want, with even greater intensity, the heroine he described; and most of all, I didn\rquote t want the events he described. \par
\tab I have always found myself unable, however, to express a negative reaction to people, especially face to face. I did my best to smile and act interested. \par
\tab The next day I called up Doubleday. It might not be too late. I asked if the contract had been signed. Yes, indeed, it had, and a large advance had been paid over, of which most was to be turned over to me. \par
\tab I didn\rquote t think there was room for my spirits to sink lower, but they did. I \i had \i0 to write the story. \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, then,\rdblquote  I said, \ldblquote if what I write is not acceptable, would you return the advance?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We don\rquote t have to,\rdblquote  I was told. \ldblquote The advance is unconditional. If they don\rquote t like your story, we still keep the advance.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No,\rdblquote  I said. \ldblquote I don\rquote t want it that way. If what I do is unacceptable, I want the entire advance returned. Take your share of it out of my royalties.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Doubleday doesn\rquote t like to refuse me anything either, so they agreed, although they made it plain they would return their share and not take anything out of my royalties. \par
\tab That meant I was under no obligation to do anything but my best, as I conceived that best to be. On September 1, 1969, I began to write WATERCLAP and I did it my way. I knew exactly what the movie people wanted and I didn\rquote t give it to them. Naturally, they rejected it when it was done and every cent they had advanced was returned to them. \par
\tab This was a huge relief to me, you can well imagine. \par
\tab And there is a world outside Hollywood, too. Ejler Jakobsson of \i Galaxy \i0 liked the story as I had written it, so it appeared in the May 1970 issue of that magazine. He paid me far less than the movie people would have, but then, all he bought was the story. \par
\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 Waterclap\par
\pard\kerning0\f0\fs20\par
\b0\tab Stephen Demerest looked at the textured sky. He kept looking at it and found the blue opaque and revolting. \par
\tab Unwarily, he had looked at the Sun, for there was nothing to blank it out automatically, and then he had snatched his eyes away in panic. He wasn\rquote t blinded; just a few afterimages. Even the Sun was washed out. \par
\tab Involuntarily, he thought of Ajax\rquote s prayer in Homer\rquote s \i Iliad. \i0 They were fighting over the body of Patroclus in the mist and Ajax said, \ldblquote O Father Zeus, save the Achaeans out of this mist! Make the sky clean, grant us to see with our eyes! Kill us in the light, since it is thy pleasure to kill us!\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest thought: Kill us in the light--\par
\tab Kill us in the clear light on the Moon, where the sky is black and soft, where the stars shine brightly, where the cleanliness and purity of vacuum make all things sharp. \par
\tab --Not in this low-clinging, fuzzy blue. \par
\tab He shuddered. It was an actual physical shudder that shook his lanky body, and he was annoyed. He was going to die. He was sure of it. And it wouldn\rquote t be under the blue, either, come to think of it, but under the black--but a different black. \par
\tab It was as though in answer to that thought that the ferry pilot, short, swarthy, crisp-haired, came up .to him and said, \ldblquote Ready for the black, Mr. Demerest?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest nodded. He towered over the other as he did over most of the men of Earth. They were thick, all of them, and took their short, low steps with ease. He himself had to feel his footsteps, guide them through the air; even the impalpable bond that held him to the ground was textured. \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m ready,\rdblquote  he said. He took a deep breath and deliberately repeated his earlier glance at the Sun. It was low in the morning sky, washed out by dusty air, and he knew it wouldn\rquote t blind him. He didn\rquote t think he would ever see it again. \par
\tab He had never seen a bathyscaphe before. Despite everything, he tended to think of it in terms of prototypes, an oblong balloon with a spherical gondola beneath. It was as though he persisted in thinking of space flight in terms of tons of fuel spewed backward in fire, and an irregular module feeling its way, spiderlike, toward the Lunar surface. \par
\tab The bathyscaphe was not like the image in his thoughts at all. Under its skin, it might still be buoyant bag and gondola, but it was all engineered sleekness now. \par
\tab\ldblquote My name is Javan,\rdblquote  said the ferry pilot. \ldblquote Omar Javan.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Javan?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Queer name to you? I\rquote m Iranian by descent; Earthman by persuasion. Once you get down there, there are no nationalities.\rdblquote  He grinned and his complexion grew darker against the even whiteness of his teeth. \ldblquote If you don\rquote t mind, we\rquote ll be starting in a minute. You\rquote ll be my only passenger, so I guess you carry weight.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  said Demerest dryly. \ldblquote At least a hundred pounds more than I\rquote m used to.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You\rquote re from the Moon? I thought you had a queer walk on you. I hope it\rquote s not uncomfortable.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s not exactly comfortable, ,but I manage. We exercise for this.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, come on board.\rdblquote  He stood aside and let Demerest walk down the gangplank. \ldblquote I wouldn\rquote t go to the Moon myself.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You go to Ocean-Deep.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote About fifty times so far. That\rquote s different.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest got on board. It was cramped, but he didn\rquote t mind that. It might be a space module except that it was more--well, textured. There was that word again. There was the clear feeling everywhere that mass didn\rquote t matter. Mass was held up; it didn\rquote t have to be hurled up. \par
\tab They were still on the surface. The blue sky could be seen greenishly through the clear thick glass. Javan said, \ldblquote You don\rquote t have to be strapped in. There\rquote s no acceleration. Smooth as oil, the whole thing. It won\rquote t take long; just about an hour. You can\rquote t smoke.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t smoke,\rdblquote  said Demerest. \par
\tab\ldblquote I hope you don\rquote t have claustrophobia.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Moon-men don\rquote t have claustrophobia.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote All that open--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not in our cavern. We live in a\rdblquote --he groped for the phrase --\rdblquote a Lunar-Deep, a hundred feet deep.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote A hundred feet!\rdblquote  The pilot seemed amused, but he didn\rquote t smile. \ldblquote We\rquote re slipping down now.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The interior of the gondola was fitted into angles but here and there a section of wall beyond the instruments showed its basic sphericity. To Javan, the instruments seemed to be an extension of his arms; his eyes and hands moved over them lightly, almost lovingly. \par
\tab\ldblquote We\rquote re all checked out,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote but I like a last-minute look-over; we\rquote ll be facing a thousand atmospheres down there.\rdblquote  His finger touched a contact, and the round door closed massively inward and pressed against the beveled rim it met. \par
\tab\ldblquote The higher the pressure, the tighter that will hold,\rdblquote  said Javan. \ldblquote Take your last look at sunlight, Mr. Demerest.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The light still shone through the thick glass of the window. It was wavering now; there was water between the Sun and them now. \par
\tab\ldblquote The last look?\rdblquote  said Demerest. \par
\tab Javan snickered. \ldblquote Not the \i last \i0 look. I mean for the trip. ...I suppose you\rquote ve never been, on a bathyscaphe before.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, I haven\rquote t. Have many?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Very few,\rdblquote  admitted Javan. \ldblquote But don\rquote t worry. It\rquote s just an underwater balloon. We\rquote ve introduced a million improvements since the first bathyscaphe. It\rquote s nuclear-powered now and we can move freely by water jet up to certain limits, but cut it down to basics and it\rquote s still a spherical gondola under buoyancy tanks. And it\rquote s still towed out to sea by a mother ship because it needs what power it carries too badly to waste it on surface travel. Ready?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Ready.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The supporting cable of the mother ship flicked away and the bathyscaphe settled lower; then lower still, as sea water fed into the buoyancy tanks. For a few moments, caught in surface currents, it swayed, and then there was nothing. The bathyscaphe sank slowly through a deepening green. \par
\tab Javan relaxed. He said, \ldblquote John Bergen is head of Ocean-Deep. You\rquote re going to see him?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s right.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote He\rquote s a nice guy. His wife\rquote s with him.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote She is?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh, sure. They have women down there. There\rquote s a bunch down there, fifty people. \ldblquote Some stay for months.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest put his finger on the narrow, nearly invisible seam where door met wall. He took it away and looked at it. He said, \ldblquote It\rquote s oily.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Silicone, really. The pressure squeezes some out. It\rquote s supposed to. ...Don\rquote t worry. Everything\rquote s automatic. Everything\rquote s fail-safe. The first sign of malfunction, any malfunction at all, our ballast is released and up we go.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You mean nothing\rquote s ever happened to these bathyscaphes?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What can happen?\rdblquote  The pilot looked sideways at his passenger. \ldblquote Once you get too deep for sperm whales, nothing can go wrong.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Sperm whales?\rdblquote  Demerest\rquote s thin face creased in a frown. \par
\tab\ldblquote Sure, they dive as deep as half a mile. If they hit a bathyscaphe--well, the walls of the buoyancy chambers aren\rquote t particularly strong. They don\rquote t have to be, you know. They\rquote re open to the sea and when the gasoline, which supplies the buoyancy, compresses, sea water enters.\rdblquote  \par
\tab It was dark now. Demerest found his gaze fastened to the viewport. It was light inside the gondola, but it was dark in that window. And it was not the darkness of space; it was a thick darkness. \par
\tab Demerest said sharply, \ldblquote Let\rquote s get this straight, Mr. Javan. You are not equipped to withstand the attack of a sperm whale. Presumably you are not equipped to withstand the attack of a giant squid. Have there been any actual incidents of that sort?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, it\rquote s like this--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No games, please, and don\rquote t try ragging the greenhorn. I am asking out of professional curiosity. I am head safety engineer at Luna City and I am asking what precautions this bathyscaphe can take against possible collision with large creatures.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Javan looked embarrassed. He muttered, \ldblquote Actually, there have been no incidents.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Are any expected? Even as a remote possibility?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Anything is remotely possible. But actually sperm whales are too intelligent to monkey with us and giant squid are too shy.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Can they see us?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, of course. We\rquote re lit up.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Do you have floodlights?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We\rquote re already past the large-animal range, but we have them, and I\rquote ll turn them on for you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Through the black of the window there suddenly appeared a snow-storm, an inverted upward-falling snowstorm. The blackness had come alive with stars in three-dimensional array and all moving upward. \par
\tab Demerest said, \ldblquote What\rquote s that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Just crud. Organic matter. Small creatures. They float, don\rquote t move much, and they catch the light. We\rquote re going down past them. They seem to be going up in consequence.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest\rquote s sense of perspective adjusted itself and he said, \ldblquote Aren\rquote t we dropping too quickly?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, we\rquote re not. If we were, I could use the nuclear engines, if I wanted to waste power; or I could drop some ballast. I\rquote ll be doing that later, but for now everything is fine. Relax, Mr. Demerest. The snow thins as we dive and we\rquote re not likely to see much in the way of spectacular life forms. There are small angler fish and such but they avoid us.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest said, \ldblquote How many do you take down at a time?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote ve had as many as four passengers in this gondola, but that\rquote s crowded. We can put two bathyscaphes in tandem and carry ten, but that\rquote s clumsy. What we really need are trains of gondolas, heavier on the nukes-the nuclear engines-and lighter on the buoyancy. Stuff like that is on the drawing board, they tell me. Of course, they\rquote ve been telling me that for years.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There are plans for large-scale expansion of Ocean-Deep, then?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Sure, why not? We\rquote ve got cities on the continental shelves, why not on the deep-sea bottom? The way I look at it, Mr. Demerest, where man can go, he will go and he should go. The Earth is ours to populate and we will populate it. All we need to make the deep sea habitable are completely maneuverable \lquote scaphes. The buoyancy chambers slow us, weaken us, and complicate the engineering.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But they also save you, don\rquote t they? If everything goes wrong at once, the gasoline you carry will still float you to the surface-. What would do that for you if your nuclear engines go wrong and you had no buoyancy?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If it comes to that, you can\rquote t expect to eliminate the chances of accident altogether, not even fatal ones.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I know that very well,\rdblquote  said Demerest feelingly. \par
\tab Javan stiffened. The tone of his voice changed. \ldblquote Sorry. Didn\rquote t mean anything by that. Tough about that accident.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  said Demerest. Fifteen men and five women had died. One of the individuals listed among the \ldblquote men \ldblquote  had been fourteen years old. It had been pinned down to human failure. What could a head safety engineer say after that? \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  he said. \par
\tab A pall dropped between the two men, a pall as thick and as turgid as the pressurized sea water outside. How could one allow for panic and for distraction and for depression all at once? There were the Moon-Blues--stupid name--but they struck men at inconvenient times. It wasn\rquote t always noticeable when the Moon-Blues came but it made men torpid and slow to react. \par
\tab How many times had a meteorite come along and been averted or smothered or successfully absorbed? How many times had a Moonquake done damage and been held in check? How many times had human failure been backed up and compensated for? How many times had accidents \i not \i0 happened? \par
\tab But you don\rquote t payoff on accidents not happening. There were twenty dead--\par
\par
\tab Javan said (how many long minutes later?), \ldblquote There are the lights of Ocean-Deep!\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest could not make them out at first. He didn\rquote t know where to look. Twice before, luminescent creatures had flicked past the windows at a distance and with the floodlights off again, Demerest had thought them the first sign of Ocean-Deep. Now he saw nothing. \par
\tab\ldblquote Down there,\rdblquote  said Javan, without pointing. He was busy now, slowing the drop and edging the \lquote scaphe sideways. \par
\tab Demerest could hear the distant sighing of the water jets, steam-driven, with the steam formed by the heat of momentary bursts of fusion power. \par
\tab Demerest thought dimly: Deuterium is their fuel and it\rquote s all around them. Water is their exhaust and it\rquote s all around them. \par
\tab Javan was dropping some of his ballast, too, and began a kind of distant chatter. \ldblquote The ballast used to be steel pellets and they were dropped by electromagnetic controls. Anywhere up to fifty tons of it were used in each trip. Conservationists worried about spreading rusting steel over the ocean floor, so we switched to metal nodules that are dredged up from the continental shelf. We put a thin layer of iron over them so they can still be electromagnetically handled and the ocean bottom gets nothing that wasn\rquote t sub-ocean to begin with. Cheaper, too. ...But when we get out real nuclear \lquote scaphes, we won\rquote t need ballast at all.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest scarcely heard him. Ocean-Deep could be seen now. Javan had turned on the floodlights and far below was the muddy floor of the Puerto Rican Trench. Resting on that floor like a cluster of equally muddy pearls was the spherical conglomerate of Ocean-Deep. \par
\tab Each unit was a sphere such as the one in which Demerest was now sinking toward contact, but much larger, and as Ocean-Deep expanded--expanded--expanded, new spheres were added. \par
\tab Demerest thought: They\rquote re only five and a half miles from home, not a quarter of a million. \par
\par
\tab\ldblquote How are we going to get through?\rdblquote  asked Demerest. \par
\tab The \lquote scaphe had made contact. Demerest heard the dull sound of metal against metal but then for minutes there had been nothing more than a kind of occasional scrape as Javan bent over his instruments in rapt concentration. \par
\tab\ldblquote Don\rquote t worry about that,\rdblquote  Javan said at last, in belated answer. \ldblquote There\rquote s no problem. The delay now is only because I have to make sure we fit tightly. There\rquote s an electromagnet joint that holds at every point of a perfect circle. When the instruments read correctly, that means we fit over the entrance door.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Which then opens?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It would if there were air on the other side, but there isn\rquote t. There\rquote s sea water, and that has to be driven out. \i Then \i0 we enter.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest did not miss this point. He had come here on this, the last day of his life, to give that same life meaning and he intended to miss nothing. \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote Why the added step? Why not keep the air lock, if that\rquote s what it is, a real air lock, and have air in it at an times?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote They tell me it\rquote s a matter of safety,\rdblquote  said Javan. \i\ldblquote Your \i0 specialty. The interface has equal pressure on both sides at all times, \i except \i0 when men are moving across. This door is the weakest point of the whole system, because it opens and closes; it has joints; it has seams. You know what I mean?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I do,\rdblquote  murmured Demerest. There was a logical flaw here and that meant there was a possible chink through which--but later. \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote Why are we waiting now?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The lock is being emptied. The water is being forced out.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote By air.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Hell, no. They can\rquote t afford to waste air like that. It would take a thousand atmospheres to empty the chamber of its water, and filling the chamber with air at that density, even temporarily, is more air than they can afford to expend. Steam is what does it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Of course. Yes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Javan said cheerfully, \ldblquote You heat the water. No pressure in the world can stop water from turning to steam at a temperature of more than 374\'b0 C. And the steam forces the sea water out through a one-way valve.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Another weak point,\rdblquote  said Demerest. \ldblquote I suppose so. It\rquote s never failed yet. The water in the lock is being pushed out now. When hot steam starts bubbling out the valve, the process automatically stops and the lock is fun of overheated steam.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And then?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And then we have a whole ocean to cool it with. The temperature drops and the steam condenses. Once that happens, ordinary air can be let in at a pressure of one atmosphere and \i then \i0 the door opens.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How long must we wait?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not long. If there were anything wrong, there\rquote d be sirens sounding. At least, so they say. I never heard one in action.\rdblquote  \par
\tab There was silence for a few minutes, and then there was a sudden sharp clap and a simultaneous jerk. \par
\tab Javan said, \ldblquote Sorry, I should have warned you. I\rquote m so used to it I forgot. When the door opens, a thousand atmospheres of pressure on the other side forces us hard against the metal of Ocean-Deep. No electromagnetic force can hold us hard enough to prevent that last hundredth-of-an-inch slam.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest unclenched his fist and released his breath. He said, \ldblquote Is everything all right?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The walls didn\rquote t crack, if that\rquote s what you mean. It sounds like doom, though, doesn\rquote t it? It sounds even worse when I\rquote ve got to leave and the air lock fills up again. Be prepared for that.\rdblquote  \par
\tab But Demerest was suddenly weary. Let\rquote s get on with it, he thought. I don\rquote t want to drag it out. He said, \ldblquote Do we go through now?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We go through.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The opening in the \lquote scaphe wall was round and small; even smaller than the one through which they had originally entered. Javan went through it sinuously, muttering that it always made him feel like a cork in a bottle. \par
\tab Demerest had not smiled since he entered the \lquote scaphe. Nor did he really smile now, but a comer of his mouth quirked as he thought that a skinny Moon-man would have no trouble. \par
\tab He went through also, feeling Javan\rquote s hands firmly at his waist, helping him through. \par
\tab Javan said, \ldblquote It\rquote s dark in here. No point in introducing an additional weakness by wiring for lighting. But that\rquote s why flashlights were invented.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest found himself on a perforated walk, its stainless metallic surface gleaming dully. And through the perforations he could make out the wavering surface of water. \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote The chamber hasn\rquote t been emptied.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You can\rquote t do any better, Mr. Demerest. If you\rquote re going to use steam to empty it, you\rquote re left with that steam, and to get the pressures necessary to do the emptying that steam must be compressed to a~ut one-third the density of liquid water. When it condenses, the chamber remains one-third full of water--but it\rquote s water at just one-atmosphere pressure. ... Come on, Mr. Demerest.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\tab John Bergen\rquote s face wasn\rquote t entirely unknown to Demerest. Recognition was immediate. Bergen, as head of Ocean-Deep for nearly a decade now, was a familiar face on the TV screens of Earth-just as the leaders of Luna City had become familiar. \par
\tab Demerest had seen the head of Ocean-Deep both flat and in three dimensions, in black-and-white and in color. Seeing him in life added little. \par
\tab Like Javan, Bergen was short and thickset; opposite in structure to the traditional ( already traditional?) Lunar pattern of physiology. He was fairer than Javan by a good deal and his face was noticeably asymmetrical, with his somewhat thick nose leaning just a little to the right. \par
\tab He was not handsome. No Moon-man would think he was, but then Bergen smiled and there was a sunniness about it as he held out his large hand. \par
\tab Demerest placed his own thin one within, steeling himself for a hard grip, but it did not come. Bergen took the hand and let it go, then said, \ldblquote I\rquote m glad you\rquote re here. We don\rquote t have much in the way of luxury, nothing that will make our hospitality stand out, we can\rquote t even declare a holiday in your honor--but the spirit is there. Welcome!\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Thank you,\rdblquote  said Demerest softly. He remained unsmiling now, too. He was facing the enemy and he knew it. Surely Bergen must know it also and, since he did, that smile of his was hypocrisy. \par
\tab And at that moment a clang like metal against metal sounded deafeningly and the chamber shuddered. Demerest leaped back and staggered against the wall. \par
\tab Bergen did not budge. He said quietly, \ldblquote That was the bathyscaphe unhitching and the waterclap of the air lock filling. Javan ought to have warned you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest panted and tried to make his racing heart slow. He said, \ldblquote Javan did warn me. I was caught by surprise anyway.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen said, \ldblquote Well, it won\rquote t happen again for a while. We don\rquote t often have visitors, you know. We\rquote re not equipped for it and so we fight off all kinds of big wheels who think a trip down here would be good for their careers. Politicians of all kinds, chiefly. Your own case is different of course.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Is it? thought Demerest. It had been hard enough to get permission to make the trip down. His superiors back at Luna City had not approved in the first place and had scouted the idea that a diplomatic interchange would be of any use. ( \ldblquote Diplomatic interchange\rdblquote  was what they had called it. ) And when he had overborne them, there had been Ocean-Deep\rquote s own reluctance to receive him. \par
\tab It had been sheer persistence alone that had made his present visit possible. In what way then was Demerest\rquote s case different? \par
\tab Bergen said, \ldblquote I suppose you have your junketing problems on Luna City, too?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Very little,\rdblquote  said Demerest. \ldblquote Your average politician isn\rquote t as anxious to travel a half-million-mile round trip as he is to travel a ten-mile one.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I can see that,\rdblquote  agreed Bergen, \ldblquote and it\rquote s more expensive out to the Moon, of course. ...In a way, this is the first meeting of inner and outer space. No Ocean-man has ever gone to the Moon as far as I know and you\rquote re the first Moonman to visit a sub-sea station of any kind. No Moon-man has ever been to one of the settlements on the continental shelf.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s a historic meeting, then,\rdblquote  said Demerest, and tried to keep the sarcasm out of his voice. \par
\tab If any leaked through, Bergen showed no sign. He rolled up his sleeves as though to emphasize his attitude of informality (or the fact that they were very busy, so that there would be little time for visitors?) and said, \ldblquote Do you want coffee? I assume you\rquote ve eaten. Would you like to rest before I show you around? Do you want to wash up, for that matter, as they say euphemistically?\rdblquote  \par
\tab For a moment, curiosity stirred in Demerest; yet not entirely aimless curiosity. Everything involving the interface of Ocean-Deep with the outside world could be of importance. He said, \ldblquote How are sanitary facilities handled here?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s cycled mostly; as it is on the Moon, I imagine. We can eject if we want to or have to. Man has a bad record of fouling the environment, but as the only deep-sea station, what we eject does no perceptible damage. Adds organic matter.\rdblquote  He laughed. \par
\tab Demerest filed that away, too. Matter was ejected; there was therefore ejection tubes. Their workings might be of interest and he, as a safety engineer, had a right to be interested. \par
\tab\ldblquote No, he said, \ldblquote I don\rquote t need anything at the moment. If you\rquote re busy--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s all right. We\rquote re always busy, but I\rquote m the least busy, if you see what I mean. Suppose I show you around. We\rquote ve got over fifty units here, each as big as this one, some bigger--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest looked about. Again, as in the \lquote scaphe, there were angles everywhere, but beyond the furnishings and equipment there were signs of the inevitable spherical outer wall. Fifty of them! \par
\tab\ldblquote Built up,\rdblquote  went on Bergen, \ldblquote over a generation of effort. The unit we\rquote re standing in is actually the oldest and there\rquote s been some talk of demolishing and replacing it. Some of the men say we\rquote re ready for second-generation units, but I\rquote m not sure. It would be expensive--everything\rquote s expensive down here--and getting money out of the Planetary Project Council is always a depressing experience.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest felt his nostrils flare involuntarily and a spasm of anger shot through him. It was a thrust; surely. Luna City\rquote s miserable record with the PPC must be well known to Bergen. \par
\tab But Bergen went on, unnoticing. \ldblquote I\rquote m a traditionalist, too--just a little bit. This is the first deep-sea unit ever constructed. The first two people to remain overnight on the floor of an ocean trench slept here with nothing else beyond this bare sphere except for a miserable portable fusion unit to work the escape hatch. I mean the air lock, but we called it the escape hatch to begin with--and just enough controls for the purpose. Reguera and Tremont, those were the men. They never made a second trip to the bottom, either; stayed Topside forever after. Well, well, they served their purpose and both are dead now. And here we are with fifty people and with six months as the usual tour of duty. I\rquote ve spent only two weeks Topside in the last year and a half.\rdblquote  \par
\tab He motioned vigorously to Demerest to follow him, slid open a door which moved evenly into a recess, and took him into the next unit. Demerest paused to examine the opening. There were no seams that he could notice between the adjacent units. \par
\tab Bergen noted the other\rquote s pause and said, \ldblquote When we add on our units, they\rquote re welded under pressure into the equivalent of a single piece of metal and then reinforced. We can\rquote t take chances, as I\rquote m sure you understand, since I have been given to understand that you\rquote re the head safe--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest cut him off. \ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote We on the Moon admire your safety record.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen shrugged. \ldblquote We\rquote ve been lucky. Our sympathy, by the way, on the rotten break you fellows had. I mean that fatal--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest cut him off again. \ldblquote Yes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen, the Moon-man decided, was either a naturally voluble man or else was eager to drown him in words and get rid of him. \par
\tab\ldblquote The units,\rdblquote  said Bergen, \ldblquote are arranged in a highly branched chain-three-dimensional actually. We have a map we can show you, if you\rquote re interested. Most of the end units represent living-sleeping quarters. For privacy, you know. The working units tend to be corridors as well, which is one of the embarrassments of having to live down here. \par
\tab\ldblquote This is our library; part of it, anyway. Not big, but it\rquote s got our records, too, on carefully indexed and computed microfilm, so that for its kind it\rquote s not only the biggest in the world, but the best and the only. And we have a special computer to handle the references to meet our needs exactly. It collects, selects, coordinates, weighs, then gives us the gist. \par
\tab\ldblquote We have another library, too, book films and even some printed volumes. But that\rquote s for amusement.\rdblquote  \par
\tab A voice broke in on Bergen\rquote s cheerful flow. \ldblquote John? May I interrupt?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest started; the voice had come from behind him. Bergen said, \ldblquote Annette! I was going to get you. This is Stephen Demerest of Luna City. Mr. Demerest, may I introduce my wife, Annette?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest had turned. He said stiffly, a little mechanically, \ldblquote I\rquote m pleased to meet you, Mrs. Bergen.\rdblquote  But he was staring at her waistline. \par
\tab Annette Bergen seemed in her early thirties. Her brown hair was combed simply and she wore no makeup. Attractive, not beautiful, Demerest \lquote noted vaguely. But his eyes kept returning to that waistline. \par
\tab She shrugged a little. \ldblquote Yes, I\rquote m pregnant, Mr. Demerest. I\rquote m due in about two months.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Pardon me,\rdblquote  Demerest muttered. \ldblquote So rude of me. ...I didn\rquote t--\rdblquote  He faded off and felt as though the blow had been a physical one. He hadn\rquote t expected women, though he didn\rquote t know why. He \i knew \i0 there would have to be women in Ocean-Deep. And the ferry pilot had said Bergen\rquote s wife was with him. \par
\tab He stammered as he spoke. \ldblquote How many women are there in Ocean-Deep, Mr. Bergen?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Nine at the moment,\rdblquote  said Bergen. \ldblquote All wives. We look forward to a time when we can have the normal ratio of one to one, but we still need workers and researchers primarily, and unless women have important qualifications of \i some \i0 sort--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote They all have important qualifications of \i some \i0 sort, dear,\rdblquote  said Mrs. Bergen. \ldblquote You could keep the men for longer duty if--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote My wife,\rdblquote  said Bergen, laughing, \ldblquote is a convinced feminist but is not above using sex as an excuse to enforce equality. I keep telling her that that is the feminine way of doing it and not the feminist way, and she keeps saying-Well, that\rquote s why she\rquote s pregnant. You think it\rquote s love, sex mania, yearning for motherhood? Nothing of the sort. She\rquote s going to have a baby down here to make a philosophical point.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Annette said coolly, \ldblquote Why not? Either this is going to be home for humanity or it isn\rquote t going to be. If it \i is, \i0 then we\rquote re going to have babies here, that\rquote s all. I want a baby born in Ocean-Deep. There are babies born in Luna City, aren\rquote t there, Mr. Demerest?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest took a deep breath. \i\ldblquote I \i0 was born in Luna City, Mrs. Bergen.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And well she knew it, \ldblquote  muttered Bergen. \par
\tab\ldblquote And you are in your late twenties, I think?\rdblquote  she said. \par
\tab\ldblquote I am twenty-nine,\rdblquote  said Demerest. \par
\tab\ldblquote And well she knew that, too,\rdblquote  said Bergen with a short laugh. \ldblquote You can bet she looked up all possible data on you when she heard you were coming.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That is quite beside the point,\rdblquote  said Annette. \ldblquote The point is that for twenty-nine years at least children have been born in Luna City and no children have been born in Ocean-Deep.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Luna City, my dear,\rdblquote  said Bergen, \ldblquote is longer-established. It is over half a century old; we are not yet twenty.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Twenty years is quite enough. It takes a baby nine months.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest interposed, \ldblquote Are there any children in Ocean-Deep?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No,\rdblquote  said Bergen. \ldblquote No. Someday, though.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In two months, anyway,\rdblquote  said Annette Bergen positively. \par
\par
\tab The tension grew inside Demerest and when they returned to the unit in which he had first met Bergen, he was glad to sit down and accept a cup of coffee. \par
\tab\ldblquote We\rquote ll eat soon,\rdblquote  said Bergen matter-of-factly. \ldblquote I hope you don\rquote t mind sitting here meanwhile. As the prime unit, it isn\rquote t used for much except, of course, for the reception of vessels, an item I don\rquote t expect will interrupt us for a while. We can talk, if you wish.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I \i do \i0 wish,\rdblquote  said Demerest. \par
\tab\ldblquote I hope I\rquote m welcome to join in,\rdblquote  said Annette. \par
\tab Demerest looked at her doubtfully, but Bergen said to him, \ldblquote You\rquote ll have to agree. She\rquote s fascinated by you and by Moon-men generally. She thinks they\rquote re--uh\i --you\rquote re \i0 a new breed, and I think that when she\rquote s quite through being a Deep-woman she wants to be a Moon-woman:\rquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I just want to get a word in edgewise, John, and when I get that in, I\rquote d like to hear what Mr. Demerest has to say. What do you think of us, Mr. Demerest?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest said cautiously, \ldblquote I\rquote ve asked to come here, Mrs. Bergen, because I\rquote m a safety engineer. Ocean-Deep has an enviable safety record--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not one fatality in almost twenty years,\rdblquote  said Bergen cheerfully. \ldblquote Only one death by accident in the C-shelf settlements and none in transit by either sub or \lquote scaphe. I wish I could say, though, that this was the result of wisdom and care on our part. We do our best, of course, but the breaks have been with us--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote John,\rdblquote  said Annette, \ldblquote I really wish you\rquote d let Mr. Demerest speak.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote As a safety engineer,\rdblquote  said Demerest, \ldblquote I can\rquote t afford to believe in luck and breaks. We cannot stop Moon-quakes or large meteroites out at Luna City, but we are designed to minimize the effects even of those. There are no excuses or there should be none for human failure. We have not avoided that on Luna City; our record recently has been\rdblquote --his voice dropped--\rdblquote bad. While humans are imperfect, as we all know, machinery should be designed to take that imperfection into account. We lost twenty men and women--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I know. Still, Luna City has a population of nearly one thousand, doesn\rquote t it? Your survival isn\rquote t in danger.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The people on Luna City number nine hundred and seventy-two, including myself, but our survival \i is \i0 in danger. We depend on Earth for essentials. That need not always be so; it wouldn\rquote t be so right now if the Planetary Project Council could resist the temptation toward pygmy economies--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There, at least, Mr. Demerest,\rdblquote  said Bergen, \ldblquote we see eye to eye. We are not self-supporting either, and we could be. What\rquote s more, we can\rquote t grow much beyond our present level unless nuclear \lquote scaphes are built. As long as we keep that buoyancy principle, we are limited. Transportation between Deep and Top is slow; slow for men; slower still for materiel and supplies. I\rquote ve been pushing, Mr. Demerest, for--\ldblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, and you\rquote ll be getting it now, Mr. Bergen, won\rquote t you?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I hope so, but what makes you so sure?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Mr. Bergen, let\rquote s not play around. You know very well that Earth is committed to spending a fixed amount of money on expansion projects-on programs designed to expand the human habitat-and that it is not a terribly large amount. Earth\rquote s population is not going to lavish resources in an effort to expand either outer space or inner space if it thinks this will cut into the comfort and convenience of Earth\rquote s prime habitat, the land surface of the planet.\rdblquote  Annette broke in. \ldblquote You make it sound callous of Earthmen, Mr. Demerest, and that\rquote s unfair.. It\rquote s only human, isn\rquote t it, to want to be secure? Earth is overpopulated and it is only slowly reversing the havoc inflicted on the planet by the Mad Twentieth. Surely man\rquote s original home must come first, ahead of either Luna City or Ocean-Deep. Heavens, Ocean-Deep is almost \i home \i0 to me, but I can\rquote t want to see it flourish at the expense of Earth\rquote s land.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s not an either-or, Mrs. Bergen,\rdblquote  said Demerest earnestly. \ldblquote If the ocean and outer space are firmly, honestly, and intelligently exploited, it can only redound to Earth\rquote s benefit. A small investment will be lost but a large one will redeem itself with profit.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen held up his hand. \ldblquote Yes, I know. You don\rquote t have to argue with me on that point. You\rquote d be trying to convert the converted. Come, let\rquote s eat. I tell you what. We\rquote ll eat here. If you\rquote ll stay with us overnight, or several days for that matter-you\rquote re quite welcome-there will be ample time to meet everybody. Perhaps you\rquote d rather take it easy for a while, though.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Much rather,\rdblquote  said Demerest. \ldblquote Actually, I want to stay here\'85I would like to ask, by the way, why I met so few people when we went through the units.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No mystery,\rdblquote  said Bergen genially. \ldblquote At any given time, some fifteen of our men are asleep and perhaps fifteen more are watching films or playing chess or, if their wives are with them--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, John,\rdblquote  said Annette. \par
\tab\ldblquote --And it\rquote s customary not to disturb them. The quarters are constricted and what privacy a man can have is cherished. A few are out at sea; three right now, I think. That leaves a dozen or so at work in here and you met them.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote ll get lunch,\rdblquote  said Annette, rising. \par
\tab She smiled and stepped through the door, which closed automatically behind her. \par
\tab Bergen looked after her. \ldblquote That\rquote s a concession. She\rquote s playing woman for your sake. Ordinarily, it would be just as likely for me to get the lunch. The choice is not defined by sex but by the striking of random lightning.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest said, \ldblquote The doors between units, it seems to me, are of dangerously limited strength.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Are they?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote If an accident happened, and one unit was punctured--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No meteorites down here,\rdblquote  said Bergen, smiling. \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh yes, wrong word. If there were a leak of any sort, for any reason, then could a unit or a group of units be sealed off against the full pressure of the ocean?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You mean, in the way that Luna City can have its component units automatically sealed off in case of meteorite puncture in order to limit damage to a single unit.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  said Demerest with a faint bitterness. \ldblquote As did \i not \i0 happen recently.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In theory, we could do that, but the chances of accident are much less down here. As I said, there are no meteorites and, what\rquote s more, there are no currents to speak of. Even an earthquake centered immediately below us would not be damaging since we make no fixed or solid contact with the ground beneath and are cushioned by the ocean itself against the shocks. So we can afford to gamble on no massive influx.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yet if one happened?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Then we could be helpless. You see, it is not so easy to seal off component units here. On the Moon, there is a pressure differentia] of just one atmosphere; one atmosphere inside and the zero atmosphere of vacuum outside. A thin seal is enough. Here at Ocean-Deep the pressure differential is roughly a thousand atmospheres. To secure absolute safety against that differentia] would take a great deal of money and you know what you said about getting money out of PPC. So we gamble and so far we\rquote ve been lucky.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And we haven\rquote t,\rdblquote  said Demerest. \par
\tab Bergen looked uncomfortable, but Annette distracted both by coming in with lunch at this moment. \par
\tab She said, \ldblquote I hope, Mr. Demerest, that you\rquote re prepared for Spartan fare. All our food in Ocean-Deep is prepackaged and requires only heating. We specialize in blandness and nonsurprise here, and the non-surprise of the day is a bland chicken a la king, with carrots, boiled potatoes, a piece of something that looks like a brownie for dessert, and, of course, all the coffee you can drink. \ldblquote  \par
\tab Demerest rose to take his tray and tried to smile. \ldblquote It sounds very like Moon fare, Mrs. Bergen, and I was brought up on that. We grow our own micro-organismic food. It is patriotic to eat that but not particularly enjoyable. We hope to keep improving it, though.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m sure you \i will \i0 improve it... \par
\tab Demerest said, as he ate with a slow and methodical chewing, \ldblquote I hate to ride my specialty, but how secure are you against mishaps in your air-lock entry?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It \i is \i0 the weakest point of Ocean-Deep,\rdblquote  said Bergen. He had finished eating, well ahead of the other two, and was half through with his first cup of coffee. \ldblquote But there\rquote s got to be an interface, right? The entry is as automatic as we can make it and as fail-safe. Number one: there has to be contact at every point about the outer lock before the fusion generator begins to heat the water within the lock. What\rquote s more, the contact has to be metallic and of a metal with just the magnetic permeability we use on our \lquote scaphes. Presumably a rock or some mythical deep-sea monster might drop down and make contact at just the right places; but if so, nothing happens. \par
\tab\ldblquote Then, too, the outer door doesn\rquote t open until the steam has pushed the water out and then condensed; in other words, not till both pressure and temperature have dropped below a certain point. At the moment the outer door begins to open, a relatively slight increase in internal pressure, as by water entry, will close it again.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest said, \ldblquote But then, once men have passed through the lock, the inner door closes behind them and sea water must be allowed into the lock again. Can you do that gradually against the full pressure of the ocean outside?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not very.\rdblquote  Bergen smiled. \ldblquote It doesn\rquote t pay to fight the ocean too hard. You have to roll with the punch. We slow it down to about one-tenth free entry but even so it comes in like a rifle shot-louder, a thunderclap, or waterclap, if you prefer. The inner door can hold it, though, and it is not subjected to the strain very often. Well, wait, you heard the waterclap when we first met, when Javan\rquote s \lquote scaphe took off again. Remember?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I remember,\rdblquote  said Demerest. \ldblquote But here is something I don\rquote t understand. You keep the lock filled with ocean at high pressure at all times to keep the outer door without strain. But that keeps the inner door at full strain. Somewhere there has to be strain.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, indeed. But if the outer door, with a thousand-atmosphere differential on its two sides, breaks down, the full ocean in all its millions of cubic miles tries to enter and that would be the end of all. If the inner door is the one under strain and it gives, then it will be messy indeed, but the only water that enters Ocean-Deep will be the very limited quantity in the lock and its pressure will drop at once. We will have plenty of time for repair, for the outer door will certainly hold a long time.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But if both go simultaneously--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Then we are through.\rdblquote  Bergen shrugged. \ldblquote I need not tell you that neither absolute certainty nor absolute safety exists. You have to live with some risk and the chance of double and simultaneous failure is so microscopically small that it can be lived with easily.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If all your mechanical contrivances fail--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote They fail safe,\rdblquote  said Bergen stubbornly. \par
\tab Demerest nodded. He finished the last of his chicken. Mrs. Bergen was already beginning to clean up. \ldblquote You\rquote ll pardon my questions, Mr. Bergen, I hope.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You\rquote re welcome to ask. I wasn\rquote t informed, actually, as to the precise nature of your mission here. \lquote Fact finding\rquote  is a weasel phrase. However, I assume there is keen distress on the Moon over the recent disaster and as safety engineer you rightly feel the responsibility of correcting whatever shortcomings exist and would be interested in learning, if possible, from the system used in Ocean-Deep.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Exactly. But, see here, if all your automatic contrivances fail safe for some reason, for any reason, you would be alive, but all your escape-hatch mechanisms would be sealed permanently shut. You would be trapped inside Ocean-Deep and would exchange a slow death for a fast one.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s not likely to happen but we\rquote d \i hope \i0 we could make repairs before our air supply gave out. Besides we \i do \i0 have a manual backup system.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Certainly. When Ocean-Deep was first established and this was the only unit-the one we\rquote re sitting in now-manual controls were all we had. \i That \i0 was unsafe, if you like. There they are, right behind you--covered with friable plastic.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In emergency, break glass,\rdblquote  muttered Demerest, inspecting the covered setup. \par
\tab\ldblquote Pardon me?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Just a phrase commonly used in ancient fire-fighting systems ...Well, do the manuals still work, or has the system been covered with your friable plastic for twenty years to the point where it has all decayed into uselessness with no one noticing?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not at all. It\rquote s periodically checked, as all our equipment is. That\rquote s not my job personally, but I know it is done. If any electrical or electronic circuit is out of its normal working condition, lights flash, signals sound, everything happens but a nuclear blast. , ..You know, Mr. Demerest, we are as curious about Luna City as you are about Ocean-Deep. I presume you would be willing to invite one of our young men--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How about a young woman?\rdblquote  interposed Annette at once. \par
\tab\ldblquote I am sure you mean yourself, dear,\rdblquote  said Bergen, \ldblquote to which \par
\tab I can only answer that you are determined to have a baby here and to keep it here for a period of time after birth, and that effectively eliminates you from consideration.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest said stiffly, \ldblquote We hope you will send men to Luna City. We are anxious to have you understand our problems.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, a mutual exchange of problems and of weeping on each other\rquote s shoulders might be of great comfort to all. For instance, you have one advantage on Luna City that I wish we could have. With low gravity and a low pressure differential, you can make your caverns take on any irregular and angular fashion that appeals to your aesthetic sense or is required for convenience. Down here we\rquote re restricted to the sphere, at least for the foreseeable future, and our designers develop a hatred for the spherical that surpasses belief. Actually it isn\rquote t funny. It breaks them down. They eventually resign rather than continue to work spherically.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen shook his head and leaned his chair back against a microfilm cabinet. \ldblquote You know,\rdblquote  he continued, \ldblquote when William Beebe built the first deep-set chamber in history in the 1930s--it was just a gondola suspended from a mother ship by a half-mile cable, with no buoyancy chambers and no engines, and if the cable broke, good night, only it never did. ...Anyway, what was I saying? Oh, when Beebe built his first deep-sea chamber, he was going to make it cylindrical; you know, so a man would fit in it comfortably. After all, a man is essentially a tall, skinny cylinder. However, a friend of his argued him out of that and into a sphere on the very sensible grounds that a sphere would resist pressure more efficiently than any other possible shape. You know who that friend was?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, I\rquote m afraid I don\rquote t.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The man who was President of the United States at the time of Beebe\rquote s descents-Franklin D. Roosevelt. All these spheres you see down here are the great-grandchildren of Roosevelt\rquote s suggestion.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest considered that briefly but made no comment. He returned to the earlier topic. \ldblquote We would particularly like someone from Ocean-Deep,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote to visit Luna City because it might lead to a great enough understanding of the need, on Ocean-Deep\rquote s part, for a course of action that might involve considerable self-sacrifice.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh?\rdblquote  Bergen\rquote s chair came down flat-leggedly on all fours. \ldblquote How\rquote s that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Ocean-Deep is a marvelous achievement; I wish to detract nothing from that. I can see where it will become greater still, a wonder of the world. \i Still--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\i0\ldblquote Still?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Still, the oceans are only a part of the Earth; a major part, but only a part. The deep sea is only part of the ocean. It is inner space indeed; it works inward, narrowing constantly to a point.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I think,\rdblquote  broke in Annette, looking rather grim, \ldblquote that you\rquote re about to make a comparison with Luna City.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Indeed I am,\rdblquote  said Demerest. \ldblquote Luna City represents outer space, widening to infinity. There is nowhere to go down here in the long run; everywhere to go out there.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We don\rquote t judge by size and volume alone, Mr. Demerest,\rdblquote  said Bergen. \ldblquote The ocean is only a small part of Earth, true, but for that very reason it is intimately connected with over five billion human beings. Ocean-Deep is experimental but the settlements on the continental shelf already deserve the name of cities. Ocean-Deep offers mankind the chance of exploiting the whole planet--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Of polluting the whole planet,\rdblquote  broke in Demerest excitedly. \ldblquote Of raping it, of ending it. The concentration of human effort to Earth itself is unhealthy and even fatal if it isn\rquote t balanced by a turning outward to the frontier.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There is nothing at the frontier,\rdblquote  said Annette, snapping out the words. \ldblquote The Moon is dead, all the other worlds out there are dead. If there are live worlds among the stars, light-years away, they can\rquote t be reached. This ocean is \i living.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\i0\ldblquote The Moon is living, too, Mrs. Bergen, and if Ocean-Deep allows it, the Moon will become an independent world. We Moon-men will then see to it that other worlds are reached and made alive and, if mankind but has patience, we will reach the stars. We! We! It is only we Moon-men, used to space, used to a world in a cavern, used to an engineered environment, who could endure life in a spaceship that may have to travel centuries to reach the stars.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Wait, wait, Demerest,\rdblquote  said Bergen, holding up his hand.  \ldblquote Back up! What do you mean, if Ocean-Deep allows it? What have we to do with it?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You\rquote re competing with us, Mr. Bergen. The Planetary Project Commission will swing your way, give you more, give us less, because in the short term, as your wife says, the ocean is alive and the Moon, except for a thousand men, is not; because you are a half-dozen miles away and we a quarter of a million; because you can be reached in an hour and we only in three days. And because you have an ideal safety record and we have had-misfortunes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The last, surely, is trivial. Accidents can happen any time, anywhere.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But the trivial can be used,\rdblquote  said Demerest angrily. \ldblquote It can be made to manipulate emotions. To people who don\rquote t see the purpose and the importance of space exploration, the death of Moon-men in ,accidents is proof enough that the Moon is dangerous, that its colonization is a useless fantasy. Why not? It\rquote s their excuse for saving money and they can then salve their consciences by investing part of it in Ocean-Deep instead. That\rquote s why I said the accident on the Moon had threatened the survival of Luna City even though it killed only twenty people out of nearly a thousand.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t accept your argument. There has been enough money for both for a score of years.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not enough money. That\rquote s exactly it. Not enough investment to make the Moon self-supporting in all these years, and then they use that lack of self-support against us. Not enough investment to make Ocean-Deep self-supporting either. ... But now they can give you enough if they cut us out altogether.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you think that will happen?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m almost sure it will, unless Ocean-Deep shows a statesmanlike concern for man\rquote s future.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote By refusing to accept additional funds. By not competing with Luna City. By putting the good of the whole race ahead of self-interest.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Surely you don\rquote t expect us to dismantle--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You won\rquote t have to. Don\rquote t you see? Join us in explaining that Luna City is essential, that space exploration is the hope of mankind; that you will wait, retrench, if necessary.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen looked at his wife and raised his eyebrows. She shook her head angrily. Bergen said, \ldblquote You have a rather romantic view of the PPC, I think. Even if I made noble, self-sacrificing speeches, who\rquote s to say they would listen? There\rquote s a great deal more involved in the matter of Ocean-Deep than my opinion and my statements. There are economic considerations and public feeling. Why don\rquote t you relax, Mr. Demerest? Luna City won\rquote t come to an end. You\rquote ll receive funds, I\rquote m sure of it. I tell you, I\rquote m sure of it. Now let\rquote s break this up\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, I\rquote ve got to convince you one way or another that I\rquote m serious. If necessary, Ocean-Deep must come to a halt unless the PPC can supply ample funds for both.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen said, \ldblquote Is this some sort of official mission, Mr. Demerest? Are you speaking for Luna City officially, or just for yourself?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Just for myself, but maybe that\rquote s enough, Mr. Bergen.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t think it is. I\rquote m sorry, but this is turning out to be unpleasant. I suggest that, after all, you had better return Topside on the first available \lquote scaphe.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not yet! Not yet!\rdblquote  Demerest looked about wildly, then rose unsteadily and put his back against the wall. He was a little too tall for the room and he became conscious of life receding. One more step and he would have gone too far to back out. \par
\tab He had told them back on the Moon that there would be no use talking, no use negotiating. It was dog-eat-dog for the available funds and Luna City\rquote s destiny must not be aborted; not for Ocean-Deep; not -for Earth; no, not for all of Earth, since mankind and the Universe came even before the Earth. Man must outgrow his womb and\par
\tab Demerest could hear his own ragged breathing and the inner turmoil of his whirling thoughts. The other two were looking at him with what seemed concern. Annette rose and said, \ldblquote Are you ill, Mr. Demerest?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I am \i not \i0 ill. Sit down. I\rquote m a safety engineer and I want to teach you about safety. Sit \i down, \i0 Mrs. Bergen.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Sit down, Annette,\rdblquote  said Bergen. \ldblquote I\rquote ll take care of him.\rdblquote  He rose and took a step forward. \par
\tab But Demerest said, \ldblquote No. Don\rquote t you move either. I have something right here. You\rquote re too naive concerning human dangers, Mr. Bergen. You guard against the sea and against mechanical failure and you don\rquote t search your human visitors, do you? I have a weapon, Bergen.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Now that it was out and he had taken the final step, from which there was no returning, for he was now dead whatever he did, he was quite calm. \par
\tab Annette said, \ldblquote Oh, John,\rdblquote  and grasped her husband\rquote s arm. \ldblquote He\rquote s--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen stepped in front of her. \ldblquote A weapon? Is that what that thing is? Now slowly, Demerest, slowly. There\rquote s nothing to get hot over. If you want to talk, we will talk. What is that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Nothing dramatic. A portable laser beam.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But what do you want to do with it?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Destroy Ocean-Deep.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But you can\rquote t, Demerest. You know you can\rquote t. There\rquote s only so much energy you can pack into your fist and any laser you can hold can\rquote t pump enough heat to penetrate the walls.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I know that. This packs more energy than you think. It\rquote s Moon-made and there are some advantages to manufacturing the energy unit in a vacuum. But you\rquote re right. Even so, it\rquote s designed only for small jobs and requires frequent recharging. So I don\rquote t intend to try to cut through a foot-plus of alloy steel. ...But it will do the job indirectly. For one thing, it will keep you two quiet. There\rquote s enough energy in my fist to kill two people.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You wouldn\rquote t kill us,\rdblquote  said Bergen evenly. \ldblquote You have no reason.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If by that,\rdblquote  said Demerest, \ldblquote you imply that I am an unreasoning being to be somehow made to understand my madness, forget it. I have every reason to kill you and I \i will \i0 kill you. By laser beam if I have to, though I would rather not.\rdblquote  . \par
\tab\ldblquote What good will killing us do you? Make me understand. Is it that I have refused to sacrifice Ocean-Deep funds? I couldn\rquote t do anything else. I\rquote m not really the one to make the decision. And if you kill me, that won\rquote t help you force the decision in your direction, will it? In fact, quite the contrary. If a Moon-man is a murderer, how will that reflect on Luna City? Consider human emotions on Earth.\rdblquote  \par
\tab There was just an edge of shrillness in Annette\rquote s voice as she joined in. \ldblquote Don\rquote t you see there will be people who will say that Solar radiation on the Moon has dangerous effects? That the genetic engineering which has reorganized your bones and muscles has affected mental stability? Consider the word \lquote lunatic,\rquote  Mr. Demerest. Men once believed the Moon brought madness.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I am not mad, Mrs. Bergen.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It doesn\rquote t matter,\rdblquote  said Bergen, following his wife\rquote s lead smoothly. \ldblquote Men will say that you were; that all Moon-men are; and Luna City will be closed down and the Moon itself closed to all further exploration, perhaps forever. Is that what you want?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That might happen if they thought I killed you, but they won\rquote t. It will be an accident.\rdblquote  With his left elbow, Demerest broke the plastic that covered the manual controls. \par
\tab\ldblquote I know units of this sort,\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote I know exactly how it works. Logically, breaking that plastic should set up a warning flash--after all, it might be broken by accident--and then someone would be here to investigate, or, better yet, the controls should lock until deliberately released to make sure the break w~ not merely accidental.\rdblquote  \par
\tab He paused, then said, \ldblquote But I\rquote m sure no one will come; that no warning has taken place. Your manual system is not failsafe because in your heart you were sure it would never be used.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What do you plan to do?\rdblquote  said Bergen. \par
\tab He was tense and Demerest watched his knees carefully, and said, \ldblquote If you try to jump toward me, I\rquote ll shoot at once, and then keep right on with what I\rquote m doing.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I think maybe you\rquote re giving me nothing to lose.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You\rquote ll lose time. Let me go right on without interference and you\rquote ll have some minutes to keep on talking. You may even be able to talk me out of it. There\rquote s my proposal. Don\rquote t interfere with me and I will give you your chance to argue.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But what do you plan to do?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote This,\rdblquote  said Demerest. He did not have to look. His left hand snaked out and closed a contact. \ldblquote The fusion unit will now pump heat into the air lock and the steam will empty it. It will take a few minutes. When it\rquote s done, I\rquote m sure one of those little red-glass buttons will light.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Are you going to--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest said, \ldblquote Why do you ask? You know that I must be intending, having gone this far, to Rood Ocean-Deep?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But why? Damn it, why?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Because it will be marked down as an accident. Because your safety record will be spoiled. Because it will be a complete catastrophe and will wipe you out. And PPC will then turn from you, and the glamor of Ocean-Deep will be gone. \i We \i0 will get the funds; \i we \i0 will continue. If I could bring that to pass in some other way, I would, but the needs of Luna City are the needs of mankind and those are paramount.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You will die, too,\rdblquote  Annette managed to say. \par
\tab\ldblquote Of course. Once I am forced to do something like this, would I \i want \i0 to live? I\rquote m not a murderer.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But you will be. If you flood this unit, you will flood all of Ocean-Deep and kill everyone in it--and doom those who are out in their subs to slower death. Fifty men and women --an unborn child--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That is not my fault,\rdblquote  said Demerest, in clear pain. \ldblquote I did not expect to find a pregnant woman here, but now that I have, I can\rquote t stop because of that.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But you must stop,\rdblquote  said Bergen. \ldblquote Your plan won\rquote t work unless what happens can be shown to be an accident. They\rquote ll find you with a beam emitter in your hand and with the manual controls clearly tampered with. Do you think they won\rquote t deduce the truth from that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest was feeling very tired. \ldblquote Mr. Bergen, you sound desperate. Listen-When the outer door opens, water under a thousand atmospheres of pressure will enter. It will be a massive battering ram that will destroy and mangle everything in its path. The walls of the Ocean-Deep units will remain but everything inside will be twisted beyond recognition. Human beings will be mangled into shredded tissue and splintered bone and death will be instantaneous and unfelt. Even if I were to burn you to death with the laser there would be nothing left to show it had been done, so I won\rquote t hesitate, you see. This manual unit will be smashed anyway; anything I can do will be erased by the water .\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But the beam emitter, the laser gun. Even damaged, it will be recognizable,\rdblquote  said Annette. \par
\tab\ldblquote We use such things on the Moon, Mrs. Bergen. It is a common tool; it is the optical analogue of a jackknife. I could kill you with a jackknife, you know, but one would not deduce that a man carrying a jackknife, or even holding one with the blade open, was necessarily planning murder. He might be whittling. Besides, a Moon-made laser is not a projectile gun. It doesn\rquote t have to withstand .an internal explosion. It is made of thin metal, mechanically weak. After it is smashed by the waterclap I doubt that it will make much sense as an object.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest did not have to think to make these statements. He had worked them out within himself through months of self-debate back on the Moon. \par
\tab\ldblquote In fact,\rdblquote  he went on, \ldblquote how will the investigators ever know what happened in here? They will send \lquote scaphes down to inspect what is left of Ocean-Deep, but how can they get inside without first pumping the water out? They will, in effect, have to build a new Ocean-Deep and that would take--how long? Perhaps, given public reluctance to waste money, they might never do it at all and content themselves with dropping a laurel wreath on the dead walls of the dead Ocean-Deep.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen said, \ldblquote The men on Luna City will know what you have done. Surely one of them will have a conscience. The truth will be known.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote One truth,\rdblquote  said Demerest, \ldblquote is that I am not a fool. No one on Luna City knows what I planned to do or will suspect what I have done. They sent me down here to negotiate cooperation on the matter of financial grants. I was to argue and nothing more. There\rquote s not even a laser-beam emitter missing up there. I put this one together myself out of scrapped parts. ...And it works. I\rquote ve tested it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Annette said slowly, \ldblquote You haven\rquote t thought it through. Do you know what you\rquote re doing?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote ve thought it through. I know what I\rquote m doing. ...And I know also that you are both conscious of the lit signal. I\rquote m aware of it. The air lock is empty and time\rquote s up, I\rquote m afraid.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Rapidly, holding his beam emitter tensely high, he closed another contact. A circular part of the unit wall cracked into a thin crescent and rolled smoothly away. \par
\tab Out of the corner of his eye, Demerest saw the gaping darkness, but he did not look. A dankly salt vapor issued from it; a queer odor of dead steam. He even imagined he could: hear the flopping sound of the gathered water at the bottom of the lock. \par
\tab Demerest said, \ldblquote In a rational manual unit, the outer door ought to be frozen shut now. With the inner door open, nothing ought to make the outer door open. I suspect, though, that the manuals were put together too quickly at first for that precaution to have been taken, and it was replaced too quickly for that precaution to have been added. And if I need further evidence of that, you wouldn\rquote t be sitting there so tensely if you knew the outer door wouldn\rquote t open. I need touch one more contact and the waterclap will come. We will feel nothing. \ldblquote  \par
\tab Annette said, \ldblquote Don\rquote t push it just yet. I have one more thing to say. You said we would have time to persuade you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote While the water was being pushed out.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Just let me say this. A minute. A \i minute. \i0 I said you didn\rquote t know what you were doing. You don\rquote t. You\rquote re destroying the space program, the \i space \i0 program. There\rquote s more to space than \i space.\rdblquote  \i0 Her voice had grown shrill. \par
\tab Demerest frowned. \ldblquote What are you talking about? Make sense, or I\rquote ll end it all. I\rquote m tired. I\rquote m frightened. I want it over.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Annette said, \ldblquote You\rquote re not in the inner councils of the PPC. Neither is my husband. But I am. Do you think because I am a woman that I\rquote m secondary here? I\rquote m not. You, Mr. Demerest, have your eyes fixed on Luna City only. My husband has his fixed on Ocean-Deep. Neither of you know \i anything. \par
\tab\i0\ldblquote Where do you expect to go, Mr. Demerest, if you had all the money you wanted? Mars? The asteroids? The satellites of the gas giants? These are all small worlds; all dry surfaces under a blank sky. It may be generations before we are ready to try for the stars and till then we\rquote d have only pygmy real estate. Is that your ambition? \par
\tab\ldblquote My husband\rquote s ambition is no better. He dreams of pushing man\rquote s habitat over the ocean Boor, a surface not much larger in the last analysis than the surface of the Moon and the other pygmy worlds. We of the PPC, on the other hand, want more than either of you, and if you push that button, Mr. Demerest, the greatest dream mankind has ever had will come to nothing.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Demerest found himself interested despite himself, but he said, \ldblquote You\rquote re just babbling.\rdblquote  It was possible, he knew, that somehow they had warned others in Ocean-Deep, that any moment someone would come to interrupt, someone would try to shoot him down. He was, however, staring at the only opening, and he had only to close one contact, without even looking, in a second\rquote s movement. \par
\tab Annette said, \ldblquote I\rquote m not babbling. You know it took more than rocket ships to colonize the Moon. To make a successful colony possible, men had .to be altered genetically and adjusted to low gravity. You are a product of such genetic engineering.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well ?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And might not genetic engineering also help men to greater gravitational pull? What is the largest planet of the Solar System, Mr. Demerest?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Jupi--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, Jupiter. Eleven times the diameter of the Earth; forty times the diameter of the Moon. A surface a hundred and twenty times that of the Earth in area; sixteen hundred times that of the Moon. Conditions so different from anything we can encounter anywhere on the worlds the size of Earth or less that any scientist of any persuasion would give half his life for a chance to observe at close range.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But Jupiter is an impossible target.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Indeed?\rdblquote  said Annette, and even managed a faint smile. \ldblquote As impossible as flying? Why is it impossible? Genetic engineering could design men with stronger and denser bones, stronger and more compact muscles. The same principles that enclose Luna City against the vacuum and Ocean-Deep against the sea can also enclose the future Jupiter-Deep against its ammoniated surroundings.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The gravitational field--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Can be negotiated by nuclear-powered ships that are now on the drawing board. You don\rquote t know that but I do.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We\rquote re not even sure about the depth of the atmosphere. The pressures--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The pressures! The \i pressures! \i0 Mr. Demerest, look about you. Why do you suppose Ocean-Deep was \i really \i0 built? To exploit the ocean? The settlements on the continental shelf are doing that quite adequately. To gain knowledge of the deep-sea bottom? We could do that by \lquote scaphe easily and we could then have spared the hundred billion dollars invested in Ocean-Deep so far. \par
\tab\ldblquote Don\rquote t you see, Mr. Demerest, that Ocean-Deep must mean something more than that? The purpose\rquote  of Ocean-Deep is to devise the ultimate vessels and mechanisms that will suffice to explore and colonize \i Jupiter. \i0 Look about you and see the beginnings of a Jovian environment; the closest approach we can come to it on Earth. It is only a faint image of mighty Jupiter, but it\rquote s a beginning. \par
\tab\ldblquote Destroy this, Mr. Demerest, and you destroy any hope for Jupiter. On the other hand, let us live and we will, together, penetrate and settle the brightest jewel of the Solar System. And long before we can reach the limits of Jupiter, we will be ready for the stars, for the Earth-type planets circling them, \i and \i0 the Jupiter-type planets, too. Luna City won\rquote t be abandoned because \i both \i0 are necessary for this ultimate aim.\rdblquote  \par
\tab For the moment, Demerest had altogether forgotten about that last button. He said, \ldblquote Nobody on Luna City has heard of this.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\i\ldblquote You \i0 haven\rquote t. There are those on Luna City who know. If you had told them of your plan of destruction, they would have stopped you. Naturally, we can\rquote t make this common knowledge and only a few people anywhere can know. The public supports only with difficulty the planetary projects now in progress. If the PPC is parsimonious it is because public opinion limits its generosity. What do you suppose public opinion would say if they thought we were aiming toward Jupiter? What a super-boondoggle that would be in their eyes. But we continue and what money we can save and make use of we place in the various facets of Project Big World.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Project Big World?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  said Annette. \ldblquote You know now and I have committed a serious security breach. But it doesn\rquote t matter, does it? Since we\rquote re all dead and since the project is, too.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Wait. now, Mrs. Bergeh.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote If you change your mind now, don\rquote t think you can ever talk about Project Big World. That would end the project just as effectively as destruction here would. And it would end both your career and mine. It might end Luna City and Ocean-Deep, too--so now that you know, maybe it makes no difference anyway. You might just as well push that button.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I said wait--\rdblquote  Demerest\rquote s brow was furrowed and his eyes burned with anguish. \ldblquote I don\rquote t know--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen gathered for the sudden jump as Demerest\rquote s tense alertness wavered into uncertain introspection, but Annette grasped her husband\rquote s sleeve. \par
\tab A timeless interval that might have been ten seconds long followed and then Demerest held out his laser. \ldblquote Take it,\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote I\rquote ll consider myself under arrest.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You can\rquote t be arrested,\rdblquote  said Annette, \ldblquote without the whole story coming out.\rdblquote  She took the laser and gave it to Bergen. \ldblquote It will be enough that you return to Luna City and keep silent. Till then we will keep you .under guard.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bergen was at the manual controls. The inner door slid shut and after that there was the thunderous waterclap of the water returning into the lock. \par
\par
\tab Husband and wife were alone again. They had not dared say a word until Demerest was safely put to sleep under the watchful eyes of two men detailed for the purpose. The unexpected waterclap had roused everybody and a sharply bowdlerized account of the incident had been given out. \par
\tab The manual controls were now locked off and Bergen said, \ldblquote From this point on, the manuals :will have to be adjusted to fail-safe. And visitors will have to be searched.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh, John,\rdblquote  said Annette. \ldblquote I think people are insane. There we were, facing death for us and for Ocean-Deep; just the end of everything. And I kept thinking-1 must keep calm; I mustn\rquote t have a miscarriage.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You kept calm all right. You were magnificent. I mean, Project Big World! I never conceived of such a thing, but by -by\i --Jove, \i0 it\rquote s an attractive thought. It\rquote s wonderful.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m sorry I had to say all that, John. It was all a fake, of course. I made it up, Demerest wanted me to make something up really. He wasn\rquote t a killer or destroyer; he was, according to his own overheated lights, a patriot, and I suppose he was telling himself he must destroy in order to save -a common enough view among the small-minded. But he \i said \i0 he would give us time to talk him out of it and I think he was praying we would manage to do so. He wanted us to think of something that would give him the excuse to save in order to save, and I gave it to him. I\rquote m sorry I had to fool you, John.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You didn\rquote t fool me.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I didn\rquote t?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How could you? I knew you weren\rquote t a member of PPC.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What made you so sure of that? Because I\rquote m a woman?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Not at all. Because \i I\rquote m \i0 a member, Annette, and \i that\rquote s \i0 confidential. And, if you don\rquote t mind, I will begin a move to initiate exactly what you suggested-Project Big World.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well!\rdblquote  Annette considered that and, slowly, smiled. \ldblquote Well! That\rquote s not bad. Women do have their uses.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Something,\rdblquote  said Bergen, smiling also, \ldblquote I have never denied.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\par
\b\par
\b0 Ed Ferman of \i F \i0 & \i SF \i0 and Barry Malzberg, one of the brightest of the new generation of science fiction writers, had it in mind in early 1973 to prepare an anthology in which a number of different science fiction themes were carried to their ultimate conclusion. For each story they tapped some writer who was associated with a particular theme, and for a story on the subject of robotics, they wanted me, naturally. \par
\tab I tried to beg off with my usual excuses concerning the state of my schedule, but they said if I didn\rquote t do it there would be no story on robotics at all, because they wouldn\rquote t ask anyone else. That shamed me into agreeing to do it. \par
\tab I then had to think up a way of reaching an ultimate conclusion. There had always been one aspect of the robot theme I had never had the courage to write, although the late John Campbell and I had sometimes discussed it. \par
\tab In the first two Laws of Robotics, you see, the expression \ldblquote human being\rdblquote  is used, and the assumption is that a robot can recognize a human being when he sees one. But what is a human being? Or, as the Psalmist asks of God, \ldblquote What is man that thou art mindful of him?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Surely, if there\rquote s any doubt as to the definition of man, the Laws of Robotics don\rquote t necessarily hold. So I wrote THAT THOU ART MINDFUL OF HIM, and Ed and Barry were very happy with it-and so was I. It not only appeared in the anthology, which was entitled \i Final Stage, \i0 but was also published in the May 1974 issue of \i F \i0 & \i SF. \par
\tab\i0\par
\tab\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 That Thou Art Mindful of Him \par
\pard\kerning0\b0\i\f0\fs20\par
The Three Laws \i0 of \i Robotics: \par
1. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm. \par
2. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the First Law. \par
\i0 3. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law.\par
\par
1.\par
\par
\tab Keith Harriman, who had for twelve years now been Director of Research at United States Robots and Mechanical Men Corporation, found that he was not at all certain whether he was doing right. The tip of his tongue passed over his plump but rather pale lips and it seemed to him that the holographic image of the great Susan Calvin, which stared unsmilingly down upon him, had never looked so grim before. \par
\tab Usually he blanked out that image of the greatest roboticist in history because she unnerved him. (He tried thinking of the image as \ldblquote it\rdblquote  but never quite succeeded.) This time he didn\rquote t quite dare to and her long-dead gaze bored into the side of his face. \par
\tab It was a dreadful and demeaning step he would have to take. Opposite him was George Ten, calm and unaffected either by \par
\tab Harriman\rquote s patent uneasiness or by the image of the patron saint of robotics glowing in its niche above. \par
\tab Harriman said, \ldblquote We haven\rquote t had a chance to talk this out, really, George. You haven\rquote t been with us that long and I haven\rquote t had a good chance to be alone with you. But now I would like to discuss the matter in some detail.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I am perfectly willing to do that, \ldblquote  said George. \ldblquote In my stay at U. S. Robots, I have gathered the crisis has something to do with the Three Laws.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes. You know the Three Laws, of course.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I do.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, I\rquote m sure you do. But let us dig even deeper and consider the truly basic problem. In two centuries of, if I may say so, considerable success, U. S. Robots has never managed to persuade human beings to accept robots. We have placed robots only where work is required that human beings cannot do, or in environments that human beings find unacceptably dangerous. Robots have worked mainly in space and that has limited what we have been able to do.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Surely,\rdblquote  said George Ten, \ldblquote that represents a broad limit, and one within which U. S. Robots can prosper.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, for two reasons. In the first place, the boundaries set for us inevitably contract. As the Moon colony, for instance, grows more sophisticated, its demand for robots decreases and we expect that, within the next few years, robots will be banned on the Moon. This will be repeated on every world colonized by mankind. Secondly, true prosperity is impossible without robots on Earth. We at U. S. Robots firmly believe that human beings need robots and must learn to live with their mechanical analogues if progress is to be maintained.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do they not? Mr. Harriman, you have on your desk a computer input which, I understand, is connected with the organization\rquote s Multivac. A computer is a kind of sessile robot; a robot brain not attached to a body--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote True, but that also is limited. The computers used by mankind have been steadily specialized in order to avoid too humanlike an intelligence. A century ago we were well on the way to artificial intelligence of the most unlimited type through the use of great computers we called Machines. Those Machines limited their action of their own accord. Once they had solved the ecological problems that had threatened human society, they phased themselves out. Their own continued existence would, they reasoned, have placed them in the role of a crutch to mankind and, since they felt this would harm human beings, they condemned themselves by the First Law.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And were they not correct to do so?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In my opinion, no. By their action, they reinforced mankind\rquote s Frankenstein complex; its gut fears that any artificial man they created would turn upon its creator. Men fear that robots may replace human beings.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you not fear that yourself?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I know better. As long as the Three Laws of Robotics exist, they cannot. They can serve as \i partners \i0 of mankind; they can share in the great struggle to understand and wisely direct the laws of nature so that together they can do more than mankind can possibly do alone; but always in such a way that robots serve human beings.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But if the Three Laws have shown themselves, over the course of two centuries, to keep robots within bounds, what is the source of the distrust of human beings for robots?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well\rdblquote --and Harriman\rquote s graying hair tufted as he scratched his head vigorously--\ldblquote mostly superstition, of course. Unfortunately, there are also some complexities involved that anti-robot agitators seize upon.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Involving the Three Laws?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes. The Second Law in particular. There\rquote s no problem in the Third Law, you see. It is universal. Robots must always sacrifice themselves for human beings, any human beings.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Of course,\rdblquote  said George Ten. \par
\tab\ldblquote The First Law is perhaps less satisfactory, since it is always possible to imagine a condition in which a robot must perform either Action A or Action B, the two being mutually exclusive, and where either action results in harm to human beings. The robot must therefore quickly select which action results in the least harm. To work out the positronic paths of the robot brain in such a way as to make that selection possible is not easy. If Action A results in harm to a talented young artist and B results in equivalent harm to five elderly people of no particular worth, which action should be chosen.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Action A, \ldblquote  said George Ten. \ldblquote Harm to one is less than harm to five.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, so robots have always been designed to decide. To expect robots to make judgments of fine points such as talent, intelligence, the general usefulness to society, has always seemed impractical. That would delay decision to the point where the robot is effectively immobilized. So we go by numbers. Fortunately, we might expect crises in which robots must make such decisions to be few....But then that brings us to the Second Law.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The Law of Obedience.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes. The necessity of obedience is constant. A robot may exist for twenty years without every having to act quickly to prevent harm to a human being, or find itself faced with the necessity of risking its own destruction. In all that time, however, it will be constantly obeying orders....Whose orders?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Those of a human being.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Any human being? How do you judge a human being so as to know whether to obey or not? What is man, that thou art mindful of him, George?\rdblquote  \par
\tab George hesitated at that. \par
\tab Harriman said hurriedly, \ldblquote A Biblical quotation. That doesn\rquote t matter. I mean, must a robot follow the orders of a child; or of an idiot; or of a criminal; or of a perfectly decent intelligent man who happens to be inexpert and therefore ignorant of the undesirable consequences of his order? And if two human beings give a robot conflicting orders, which does the robot follow?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In two hundred years,\rdblquote  said George Ten, \ldblquote have not these problems arisen and been solved?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No,\rdblquote  said Harriman, shaking his head violently. \ldblquote We have been hampered by the very fact that our robots have been used only in specialized environments out in space, where the men who dealt with them were experts in their field. There were no children, no idiots, no criminals, no well-meaning ignoramuses present. Even so, there were occasions when damage was done by foolish or merely unthinking orders. Such damage in specialized and limited environments could be contained. On Earth, however, robots \i must \i0 have judgment. So those against robots maintain, and, damn it, they are right.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then you must insert the capacity for judgment into the positronic brain.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Exactly. We have begun to reproduce JG models in which the robot can weigh every human being with regard to sex, age, social and professional position, intelligence, maturity, social responsibility and so on.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How would that affect the Three Laws?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The Third Law not at all. Even the most valuable robot must destroy himself for the sake of the most useless human being. That cannot be tampered with. The First Law is affected only where alternative actions will all do harm. The quality of the human beings involved as well as the quantity must be considered, provided there is time for such judgment and the basis for it, which will not be often. The Second Law will be most deeply modified, since every potential obedience must involve judgment. The robot will be slower to obey, except where the First Law is also involved, but it will obey more rationally.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But the judgments which are required are very complicated.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote\i Very. \i0 The necessity of making such judgments slowed the reactions of our first couple of models to the point of paralysis. We improved matters in the later models at the cost of introducing so many pathways that the robot\rquote s brain became far too unwieldy. In our last couple of models, however, I think we have what we want. The robot doesn\rquote t have to make an instant judgment of the worth of a human being and the value of its orders. It begins by obeying all human beings as any ordinary robot would and then it \i learns. \i0 A robot grows, learns and matures. It is the equivalent of a child at first and must be under constant supervision. As it grows, however, it can, more and more, be allowed, unsupervised, into Earth\rquote s society. Finally, it is a full member of that society.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Surely this answers the objections of those who oppose robots.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No,\rdblquote  said Harriman angrily. \ldblquote Now they raise others. They will \par
\tab not accept judgments. A robot, they say, has no right to brand this person or that as inferior. By accepting the orders of A in preference to that of B, B is branded as of less consequence than A and his human rights are violated.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What is the answer to that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There is none. I am giving up.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I see.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote As far as I myself am concerned....Instead, I turn to you, George.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote To me?\rdblquote  George Ten\rquote s voice remained level. There was a mild surprise in it but it did not affect him outwardly. \ldblquote Why to me?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Because you are not a man,\rdblquote  said Harriman tensely. \ldblquote I told you I want robots to be the partners of human beings. I want you to be mine.\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Ten raised his hands and spread them, palms outward, in an oddly human gesture. \ldblquote What can I do?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It seems to you, perhaps, that you can do nothing, George. You were created not long ago, and you are still a child. You were designed to be not overfull of original information--it was why I have had to explain the situation to you in such detail--in order to leave room for growth. But you will grow in mind and you will come to be able to approach the problem from a non-human standpoint. Where I see no solution, you, from your own other standpoint, may see one.\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Ten said, \ldblquote My brain is man-designed. In what way can it be non-human?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You are the latest of the JG models, George. Your brain is the most complicated we have yet designed, in some ways more subtly complicated than that of the old giant Machines. It is open-ended and, starting on a human basis, may--no, \i will--\i0 grow in any direction. Remaining always within the insurmountable boundaries of the Three Laws, you may yet become thoroughly non-human in your thinking.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do I know enough about human beings to approach this problem rationally? About their history? Their psychology?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Of course not. But you will learn as rapidly as you can.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Will I have help, Mr. Harriman?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No. This is entirely between ourselves. No one else knows of this and you must not mention this project to any human being, either at U. S. Robots or elsewhere.\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Ten said, \ldblquote Are we doing wrong, Mr. Harriman, that you seek to keep the matter secret?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No. But a robot solution will not be accepted, precisely because it is robot in origin. Any suggested solution you have you will turn over to me; and if it seems valuable to me, I will present it. No one will ever know it came from you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In the light of what you have said earlier,\rdblquote  said George Ten calmly, \ldblquote this is the correct procedure....When do I start?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Right now. I will see to it that you have all the necessary films for scanning.\rdblquote  \par
\par
1a.\par
\par
\tab Harriman sat alone. In the artificially lit interior of his office, there was no indication that it had grown dark outside. He had no real sense that three hours had passed since he had taken George Ten back to his cubicle and left him there with the first film references. \par
\tab He was now merely alone with the ghost of Susan Calvin, the brilliant roboticist who had, virtually single-handed, built up the positronic robot from a massive toy to man\rquote s most delicate and versatile instrument; so delicate and versatile that man dared not use it, out of envy and fear. \par
\tab It was over a century now since she had died. The problem of the Frankenstein complex had existed in \i her \i0 time, and she had never solved it. She had never tried to solve it, for there had been no need. Robotics had expanded in her day with the needs of space exploration. \par
\tab It was the very success of the robots that had lessened man\rquote s need for them and had left Harriman, in these latter times--\par
\tab But would Susan Calvin have turned to robots for help. Surely, she would have--\par
\tab And he sat there long into the night. \par
\par
2.\par
\par
\tab Maxwell Robertson was the majority stockholder of U. S. Robots and in that sense its controller. He was by no means an impressive person in appearance. He was well into middle age, rather pudgy, and had a habit of chewing on the right corner of his lower lip when disturbed. \par
\tab Yet in his two decades of association with government figures he had developed a way of handling them. He tended to use softness, giving in, smiling, and always managing to gain time. \par
\tab It was growing harder. Gunnar Eisenmuth was a large reason for its having grown harder. In the series of Global Conservers, whose power had been second only to that of the Global Executive during the past century, Eisenmuth hewed most closely to the harder edge of the gray area of compromise. He was the first Conserver who had not been American by birth and though it could not be demonstrated in any way that the archaic name of U. S. Robots evoked his hostility, everyone at U. S. Robots believed that. \par
\tab There had been a suggestion, by no means the first that year--or that generation--that the corporate name be changed to World Robots, but Robertson would never allow that. The company had been originally built with American capital, American brains, and American labor, and though the company had long been worldwide in scope and nature, the name would bear witness to its origin as long as he was in control. \par
\tab Eisenmuth was a tall man whose long sad face was coarsely textured and coarsely featured. He spoke Global with a pronounced American accent, although he had never been in the United States prior to his taking office. \par
\tab\ldblquote It seems perfectly clear to me, Mr. Robertson. There is no difficulty. The products of your company are always rented, never sold. If the rented property on the Moon is now no longer needed, it is up to you to receive the products back and transfer them.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, Conserver, but where? It would be against the law to bring them to Earth without a government permit and that has been denied.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote They would be of no use to you here. You can take them to Mercury or to the asteroids.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What would we do with them there?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Eisenmuth shrugged. \ldblquote The ingenious men of your company will think of something.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson shook his head. \ldblquote It would represent an enormous loss for the company.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m afraid it would,\rdblquote  said Eisenmuth, unmoved. \ldblquote I understand the company has been in poor financial condition for several years now.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Largely because of government imposed restrictions, Conserver.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You must be realistic, Mr. Robertson. You know that the climate of public opinion is increasingly against robots.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Wrongly so, Conserver.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But so, nevertheless. It may be wiser to liquidate the company. It is merely a suggestion, of course.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Your suggestions have force, Conserver. Is it necessary to tell you that our Machines, a century ago, solved the ecological crisis?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m sure mankind is grateful, but that was a long time ago. We now live in alliance with nature, however uncomfortable that might be at times, and the past is dim.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You mean what have we done for mankind lately?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I suppose I do.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Surely we can\rquote t be expected to liquidate instantaneously; not without enormous losses. We need time.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How much?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How much can you give us?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s not up to me.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson said softly. \ldblquote We are alone. We need play no games. How much time can you give me?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Eisenmuth\rquote s expression was that of a man retreating into inner calculations. \ldblquote I think you can count on two years. I\rquote ll be frank. The Global government intends to take over the firm and phase it out for you if you don\rquote t do it by then yourself, more or less. And unless there is a vast turn in public opinion, which I greatly doubt--\rdblquote  He shook his head. \par
\tab\ldblquote Two years, then,\rdblquote  said Robertson softly. \par
\par
2a.\par
\par
\tab Robertson sat alone. There was no purpose to his thinking and it had degenerated into retrospection. Four generations of Robertsons had headed the firm. None of them was a roboticist. It had been men such as Lanning and Bogert and, most of all, \i most \i0 of all, Susan Calvin, who had made U. S. Robots what it was, but surely the four Robertsons had provided the climate that had made it possible for them to do their work. \par
\tab Without U. S. Robots, the Twenty-first Century would have progressed into deepening disaster. That it didn\rquote t was due to the Machines that had for a generation steered mankind through the rapids and shoals of history. \par
\tab And now for that, he was given two years. What could be done in two years to overcome the insuperable prejudices of mankind? He didn\rquote t know. \par
\tab Harriman had spoken hopefully of new ideas but would go into no details. Just as well, for Robertson would have understood none of it. \par
\tab But what could Harriman do anyway? What had anyone ever done against man\rquote s intense antipathy toward the imitation. Nothing--\par
\tab Robertson drifted into a half sleep in which no inspiration came. \par
\tab\par
3.\par
\par
\tab Harriman said, \ldblquote You have it all now, George Ten. You have had everything I could think of that is at all applicable to the problem. As far as sheer mass of information is concerned, you have stored more in your memory concerning human beings and their ways, past and present, than I have, or than any human being could have.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That is very likely.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Is there anything more that you need, in your own opinion?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote As far as information is concerned, I find no obvious gaps. There may be matters unimagined at the boundaries. I cannot tell. But that would be true no matter how large a circle of information I took in.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote True. Nor do we have time to take in information forever. Robertson has told me that we only have two years, and a quarter of one of those years has passed. Can you suggest anything?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote At the moment, Mr. Harriman, nothing. I must weigh the information and for that purpose I could use help.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote From me?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No. Most particularly, not from you. You are a human being, of intense qualifications, and whatever you say may have the partial force of an order and may inhibit my considerations. Nor any other human being, for the same reason, especially since you have forbidden me to communicate with any.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But in that case, George, what help?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote From another robot, Mr. Harriman.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What other robot?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There are others of the JG series which were constructed. I am the tenth, JG-10.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The earlier ones were useless, experimental--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Mr. Harriman, George Nine exists.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, but what use will he be? He is very much like you except for certain lacks. You are considerably the more versatile of the two.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I am certain of that,\rdblquote  said George Ten. He nodded his head in a grave gesture. \ldblquote Nevertheless, as soon as I create a line of thought, the mere fact that I have created it commends it to me and I find it difficult to abandon it. 1f I can, after the development of a line of thought, express it to George Nine, he would consider it without having first created it. He would therefore view it without prior bent. He might see gaps and shortcomings that I might not.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Harriman smiled. \ldblquote Two heads are better than one, in other words, eh, George?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If by that, Mr. Harriman, you mean two individuals with one head apiece, yes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Right. Is there anything else you want?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes. Something more than films. I have viewed much concerning human beings and their world. I have seen human beings here at U. S. Robots and can check my interpretation of what I have viewed against direct sensory impressions. Not so concerning the physical world. I have never seen it and my viewing is quite enough to tell me that my surroundings here are by no means representative of it. I would like to see it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The physical world?\rdblquote  Harriman seemed stunned at the enormity of the thought for a moment. \ldblquote Surely you don\rquote t suggest I take you outside the grounds of U. S. Robots?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, that is my suggestion.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s illegal at any time. In the climate of opinion today, it would be fatal.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If we are detected, yes. I do not suggest you take me to a city or even to a dwelling place of human beings. I would like to see some open region, without human beings.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That, too, is illegal.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If we are caught. Need we be?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Harriman said, \ldblquote How essential is this, George?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I cannot tell, but it seems to me it would be useful.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Do you have something in mind?\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Ten seemed to hesitate. \ldblquote I cannot tell. It seems to me that I might have something in mind if certain areas of uncertainty were reduced.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, let me think about it. And meanwhile, I\rquote ll check out George Nine and arrange to have you occupy a single cubicle. That at least can be done without trouble.\rdblquote  \par
\par
3a.\par
\par
\tab George Ten sat alone. \par
\tab He accepted statements tentatively, put them together, and drew a conclusion; over and over again; and from conclusions built other statements which he accepted and tested and found a contradiction and rejected; or not, and tentatively accepted further. \par
\tab At none of the conclusions he reached did he feel wonder, surprise, satisfaction; merely a note of plus or minus. \par
\par
4.\par
\par
\tab Harriman\rquote s tension was not noticeably decreased even after they had made a silent downward landing on Robertson\rquote s estate. \par
\tab Robertson had countersigned the order making the dyna-foil available, and the silent aircraft, moving as easily vertically as horizontally, had been large enough to carry the weight of Harriman, George Ten, and, of course, the pilot. \par
\tab (The dyna-foil itself was one of the consequences of the Machine-catalyzed invention of the proton micro-pile which supplied pollution-free energy in small doses. Nothing had been done since of equal importance to man\rquote s comfort--Harriman\rquote s lips tightened at the thought--and yet it had not earned gratitude for U. S. Robots.) \par
\tab The air flight between the grounds of U. S. Robots and the Robertson estate had been the tricky part. Had they been stopped then, the presence of a robot aboard would have meant a great set of complications. It would be the same on the way back. The estate itself, it might be argued--it \i would \i0 be argued--was part of the property of U. S. Robots and on that property, robots, properly supervised, might remain. \par
\tab The pilot looked back and his eyes rested with gingerly briefness on George Ten. \ldblquote You want to get out at all, Mr. Harriman?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It, too?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh, yes.\rdblquote  Then, just a bit sardonically, \ldblquote I won\rquote t leave you alone with him.\rdblquote\par
\tab George Ten descended first and Harriman followed. They had come down on the foil-port and not too far off was the garden. It was quite a showplace and Harriman suspected that Robertson used juvenile hormone to control insect life without regard to environmental formulas. \par
\tab\ldblquote Come, George,\rdblquote  said Harriman. \ldblquote Let me show you.\rdblquote  Together they walked toward the garden. \par
\tab George said, \ldblquote It is a little as I have imaged it. My eyes are not properly designed to detect wavelength differences, so I may not recognize different objects by that alone.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I trust you are not distressed at being color-blind. We needed too many positronic paths for your sense of judgment and were unable to spare any for sense of color. In the future--if there is a future--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I understand, Mr. Harriman. Enough differences remain to show me that there are here many different forms of plant life.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Undoubtedly. Dozens.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And each coequal with man, biologically.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Each is a separate species, yes. There are millions of species of living creatures.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Of which the human being forms but one.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote By far the most important to human beings, however.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And to me, Mr. Harriman. But I speak in the biological sense.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I understand.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Life, then, viewed through all its forms, is incredibly complex.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, George, that\rquote s the crux of the problem. What man does for his own desires and comforts affects the complex total-of-life, the ecology, and his short-term gains can bring long-term disadvantages. The Machines taught us to set up a human society which would minimize that, but the near-disaster of the early Twenty-first Century has left mankind suspicious of innovations. That, added to its special fear of robots--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I understand, Mr. Harriman....That is an example of animal life, I feel certain.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That is a squirrel; one of many species of squirrels.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The tail of the squirrel flirted as it passed to the other side of the tree\par
\tab\ldblquote And this,\rdblquote  said George, his arm moving with flashing speed, \ldblquote is a tiny thing indeed.\rdblquote  He held it between his fingers and peered at it. \par
\tab\ldblquote It is an insect, some sort of beetle. There are thousands of species of beetles.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote With each individual beetle as alive as the squirrel and as yourself?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote As complete and independent an organism as any other, within the total ecology. There are smaller organisms still; many too small to see.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And that is a tree, is it not? And it is hard to the touch--\rdblquote  \par
\par
4a.\par
\par
\tab The pilot sat alone. He would have liked to stretch his own legs but some dim feeling of safety kept him in the dyna-foil. If that robot went out of control, he intended to take off at once. But how could he tell if it went out of control? \par
\tab He had seen many robots. That was unavoidable considering he was Mr. Robertson\rquote s private pilot. Always, though, they had been in the laboratories and warehouses, where they belonged, with many specialists in the neighborhood. \par
\tab True, Dr. Harriman was a specialist. None better, they said. But a robot here was where no robot ought to be; on Earth; in the open; free to move--He wouldn\rquote t risk his good job by telling anyone about this--but it wasn\rquote t right. \par
\par
5.\par
\par
\tab George Ten said, \ldblquote The films I have viewed are accurate in terms of what I have seen. Have you completed those I selected for you, Nine?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  said George Nine. The two robots sat stiffly, face to face, knee to knee, like an image and its reflection. Dr. Harriman could have told them apart at a glance, for he was acquainted with the minor differences in physical design. If he could not see them, but could talk to them, he could still tell them apart, though with somewhat less certainty, for George Nine\rquote s responses would be subtly different from those produced by the substantially more intricately patterned positronic brain paths of George Ten. \par
\tab\ldblquote In that case,\rdblquote  said George Ten, \ldblquote give me your reactions to what I will say. First, human beings fear and distrust robots because they regard robots as competitors. How may that be prevented?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Reduce the feeling of competitiveness,\rdblquote  said George Nine, \ldblquote by shaping the robot as something other than a human being.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yet the essence of a robot is its positronic replication of life. A replication of life in a shape not associated with life might arouse horror.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There are two million species of life forms. Choose one of those as the shape rather than that of a human being.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Which of all those species?\rdblquote  George Nine\rquote s thought processes proceeded noiselessly for some three seconds. \ldblquote One large enough to contain a positronic brain, but one not possessing unpleasant associations for human beings.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No form of land life has a braincase large enough for a positronic brain but an elephant, which I have not seen, but which is described as very large, and therefore frightening to man. How would you meet this dilemma?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Mimic a life form no larger than a man but enlarge the braincase.\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Ten said, \ldblquote A small horse, then, or a large dog, would you say? Both horses and dogs have long histories of association with human beings.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then that is well.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But consider--A robot with a positronic brain would mimic human intelligence. If there were a horse or a dog that could speak and reason like a human being, there would be competitiveness there, too. Human beings might be all the more distrustful and angry at such unexpected competition from what they consider a lower form of life.\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Nine said, \ldblquote Make the positronic brain less complex, and the robot less nearly intelligent.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The complexity bottleneck of the positronic brain rests in the Three Laws. A less complex brain could not possess the Three Laws in full measure.\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Nine said at once, \ldblquote That cannot be done.\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Ten said, \ldblquote I have also come to a dead end there. That, then, is not a personal peculiarity in my own line of thought and way of thinking. Let us start again....Under what conditions might the Third Law not be necessary?\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Nine stirred as if the question were difficult and dangerous. But he said, \ldblquote If a robot were never placed in a position of danger to itself; or if a robot were so easily replaceable that it did not matter whether it were destroyed or not.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And under what conditions might the Second Law not be necessary?\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Nine\rquote s voice sounded a bit hoarse. \ldblquote If a robot were designed to respond automatically to certain stimuli with fixed responses and if nothing else were expected of it, so that no order need ever be given it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And under what conditions\rdblquote --George Ten paused here-- \ldblquote might the First Law not be necessary?\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Nine paused longer and his words came in a low whisper, \ldblquote If the fixed responses were such as never to entail danger to human beings.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Imagine, then, a positronic brain that guides only a few responses to certain stimuli and is simply and cheaply made--so that it does not require the Three Laws. How large need it be?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not at all large. Depending on the responses demanded, it might weigh a hundred grams, one gram, one milligram.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Your thoughts accord with mine. I shall see Dr. Harriman.\rdblquote  \par
\par
5a.\par
\par
\tab George Nine sat alone. He went over and over the questions and answers. There was no way in which he could change them. And yet the thought of a robot of any kind, of any size, of any shape, of any purpose, without the Three Laws, left him with an odd, discharged feeling. \par
\tab He found it difficult to move. Surely George Ten had a similar reaction. Yet he had risen from his seat easily. \par
\par
6.\par
\par
\tab It had been a year and a half since Robertson had been closeted with Eisenmuth in private conversation. In that interval, the robots had been taken off the Moon and all the far-flung activities of U. S. Robots had withered. What money Robertson had been able to raise had been placed into this one quixotic venture of Harriman\rquote s. \par
\tab It was the last throw of the dice, here in his own garden. A year ago, Harriman had taken the robot here--George Ten, the last full robot that U. S. Robots had manufactured. Now Harriman was here with something else\par
\tab Harriman seemed to be radiating confidence. He was talking easily with Eisenmuth, and Robertson wondered if he really felt the confidence he seemed to have. He must. In Robertson\rquote s experience, Harriman was no actor. \par
\tab Eisenmuth left Harriman, smiling, and came up to Robertson. Eisenmuth\rquote s smile vanished at once. \ldblquote Good morning, Robertson,\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote What is your man up to?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote This is his show,\rdblquote  said Robertson evenly. \ldblquote I\rquote ll leave it to him.\rdblquote  Harriman called out, \ldblquote I am ready, Conserver.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote With what, Harriman?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote With my robot, sir.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Your robot?\rdblquote  said Eisenmuth. \ldblquote You have a robot here?\rdblquote  He looked about with a stem disapproval that yet had an admixture of curiosity. \par
\tab\ldblquote This is U. S. Robots\rquote  property, Conserver. At least we consider it as such.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And where is the robot, Dr. Harriman?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In my pocket, Conserver:\rquote  said Harriman cheerfully. \par
\tab What came out of a capacious jacket pocket was a small glass jar. \ldblquote That?\rdblquote  said Eisenmuth incredulously. \par
\tab\ldblquote No, Conserver,\rdblquote  said Harriman. \ldblquote This!\rdblquote  \par
\tab From the other pocket came out an object some five inches long and roughly in the shape of a bird. In place of the beak, there was a narrow tube; the eyes were large; and the tail was an exhaust channel. \par
\tab Eisenmuth\rquote s thick eyebrows drew together. \ldblquote Do you intend a serious demonstration of some sort, Dr. Harriman, or are you mad?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Be patient for a few minutes, Conserver,\rdblquote  said Harriman. \ldblquote A robot in the shape of a bird is none the less a robot for that. And the positronic brain it possesses is no less delicate for being tiny. This other object I hold is a jar of fruit flies. There are fifty fruit flies in it which will be released.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The robo-bird will catch them. Will you do the honors, sir?\rdblquote  Harriman handed the jar to Eisenmuth, who stared at it, then at \par
\tab those around him, some officials from U. S. Robots, others his own aides. Harriman waited patiently. \par
\tab Eisenmuth opened the jar, then shook it. \par
\tab Harriman said softly to the robo-bird resting on the palm of his right hand, \ldblquote Go!\rdblquote  \par
\tab The robo-bird was gone. It was a whizz through the air, with no blur of wings, only the tiny workings of an unusually small proton micro-pile. \par
\tab It could be seen now and then in a small momentary hover and then it whirred on again. All over the garden, in an intricate pattern it flew, and then was back in Harriman\rquote s palm, faintly warm. A small pellet appeared in the palm, too, like a bird dropping. \par
\tab Harriman said, \ldblquote You are welcome to study the robo-bird, Conserver, and to arrange demonstrations on your own terms. The fact is that this bird will pick up fruit flies unerringly, only those, only the one species \i Drosophila melanogaster; \i0 pick them up, kill them, and compress them for disposition.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Eisenmuth reached out his hand and touched the robo-bird gingerly, \ldblquote And therefore, Mr. Harriman? Do go on.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Harriman said, \ldblquote We cannot control insects effectively without risking damage to the ecology. Chemical insecticides are too broad; juvenile hormones too limited. The robo-bird, however, can preserve large areas without being consumed. They can be as specific as we care to make them--a different robo-bird for each species. They judge by size, shape, color, sound, behavior pattern. They might even conceivably use molecular detection--smell, in other words.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Eisenmuth said, \ldblquote You would still be interfering with the ecology. The fruit flies have a natural life cycle that would be disrupted.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Minimally. We are adding a natural enemy to the fruit-fly life cycle, one which cannot go wrong. If the fruit-fly supply runs short, the robo-bird simply does nothing. It does not multiply, it does not turn to other foods; it does not develop undesirable habits of its own. It does nothing.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Can it be called back?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Of course. We can build robo-animals to dispose of any pest. For that matter, we can build robo-animals to accomplish constructive purposes within the pattern of the ecology. Although we do not anticipate the need, there is nothing inconceivable in the possibility of robo-bees designed to fertilize specific plants, or robo-earthworms designed to mix the soil. Whatever you wish--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But why?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote To do what we have never done before. To adjust the ecology to our needs by strengthening its parts rather than disrupting it.... Don\rquote t you see? Ever since the Machines put an end to the ecology crisis, mankind has lived in an uneasy truce with nature, afraid to move in any direction. This has been stultifying us, making a kind of intellectual coward of humanity so that he begins to mistrust all scientific advance, all change.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Eisenmuth said, with an edge of hostility, \ldblquote You offer us this, do you, in exchange for permission to continue with your program of robots--I mean ordinary, man-shaped ones?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No!\rdblquote  Harriman gestured violently. \ldblquote That is over. It has served its purpose. It has taught us enough about positronic brains to make it possible for us to cram enough pathways into a tiny brain to make a robo-bird. We can turn to such things now and be prosperous enough. U. S. Robots will supply the necessary knowledge and skill and we will work in complete cooperation with the Department of Global Conservation. We will prosper. You will prosper. Mankind will prosper.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Eisenmuth was silent, thinking. When it was all over\par
\par
6a.\par
\par
\tab Eisenmuth sat alone. He found himself believing. He found excitement welling up within him. Though U. S. Robots might be the hands, the government would be the directing mind. He himself would be the directing mind. \par
\tab If he remained in office five more years, as he well might, that would be time enough to see the robotic support of the ecology become accepted; ten more years, and his own name would be linked with it indissolubly. \par
\tab Was it a disgrace to want to be remembered for a great and worthy revolution in the condition of man and the globe? \par
\par
7.\par
\par
\tab Robertson had not been on the grounds of U. S. Robots proper since the day of the demonstration. Part of the reason had been his more or less constant conferences at the Global Executive Mansion. Fortunately, Harriman had been with him, for most of the time he would, if left to himself, not have known what to say. \par
\tab The rest of the reason for not having been at U. S. Robots was that he didn\rquote t want to be. He was in his own house now, with Harriman. \par
\tab He felt an unreasoning awe of Harriman. Harriman\rquote s expertise in robotics had never been in question, but the man had, at a stroke, saved U. S. Robots from certain extinction, and somehow--Robertson felt--the man hadn\rquote t had it in him. And yet-- \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote You\rquote re not superstitious, are you, Harriman?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote In what way, Mr. Robertson?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You don\rquote t think that some aura is left behind by someone who is dead?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Harriman licked his lips. Somehow he didn\rquote t have to ask. \ldblquote You mean Susan Calvin, sir?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, of course,\rdblquote  said Robertson hesitantly. \ldblquote We\rquote re in the business of making worms and birds and bugs now. What would \i she \i0 say? I feel disgraced.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Harriman made a visible effort not to laugh. \ldblquote A robot is a robot, sir. Worm or man, it will do as directed and labor on behalf of the human being and that is the important thing.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No\rdblquote --peevishly. \ldblquote That isn\rquote t so. I can\rquote t make myself believe that.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It \i is \i0 so, Mr. Robertson,\rdblquote  said Harriman earnestly. \ldblquote We are going to create a world, you and I, that will begin, at last, to take positronic robots of \i some \i0 kind for granted. The average man may fear a robot that looks like a man and that seems intelligent enough to replace him, but he will have no fear of a robot that looks like a bird and that does nothing more than eat bugs for his benefit. Then, eventually, after he stops being afraid of some robots, he will stop being afraid of all robots. He will be so used to a robo-bird and a robo-bee and a robo-worm that a robo-man will strike him as but an extension.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson looked sharply at the other. He put his hands behind his back and walked the length of the room with quick, nervous steps. He walked back and looked at Harriman again. \ldblquote Is this what you\rquote ve been planning?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, and even though we dismantle all our humanoid robots, we can keep a few of the most advanced of our experimental models and go on designing additional ones, still more advanced, to be ready for the day that will surely come.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The agreement, Harriman, is that we are to build no more humanoid robots.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And we won\rquote t. There is nothing that says we can\rquote t keep a few of those already built as long as they never leave the factory. There is nothing that says we can\rquote t design positronic brains on paper, or prepare brain models for testing.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How do we explain doing so, though? We will surely be caught at it.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote If we are, then we can explain we are doing it in order to develop principles that will make it possible to prepare more complex microbrains for the new animal robots we are making. We will even be telling the truth.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Robertson muttered, \ldblquote Let me take a walk outside. I want to think about this. No, you stay here. I want to think about it myself.\rdblquote  \par
\par
7a.\par
\par
\tab Harriman sat alone. He was ebullient. It would surely work. There was no mistaking the eagerness with which one government official after another had seized on the program once it had been explained. \par
\tab How was it possible that no one at U. S. Robots had ever thought of such a thing? Not even the great Susan Calvin had ever thought of positronic brains in terms of living creatures other than human. \par
\tab But now, mankind would make the necessary retreat from the humanoid robot, a temporary retreat, that would lead to a return under conditions in which fear would be abolished at last. And then, with the aid and partnership of a positronic brain roughly equivalent to man\rquote s own, and existing only (thanks to the Three Laws) to serve man; and backed by a robot-supported ecology, too; what might the human race not accomplish! \par
\tab For one short moment, he remembered that it was George Ten who had explained the nature and purpose of the robot-supported ecology, and then he put the thought away angrily. George Ten had produced the answer because he, Harriman, had ordered him to do so and had supplied the data and surroundings required. The credit was no more George Ten\rquote s than it would have been a slide rule\rquote s. \par
\par
8.\par
\par
\tab George Ten and George Nine sat side by side in parallel. Neither moved. They sat so for months at a time between those occasions when Harriman activated them for consultation. They would sit so, George Ten dispassionately realized, perhaps for many years. \par
\tab The proton micro-pile would, of course, continue to power them and keep the positronic brain paths going with that minimum intensity required to keep them operative. It would continue to do so through all the periods of inactivity to come. \par
\tab The situation was rather analogous to what might be described as sleep in human beings, but there were no dreams. The awareness of George Ten and George Nine was limited, slow, and spasmodic, but what there was of it was of the real world. \par
\tab They could talk to each other occasionally in barely heard whispers, a word or syllable now, another at another time, whenever the random positronic surges briefly intensified above the necessary threshold. To each it seemed a connected conversation carried on in a glimmering passage of time. \par
\tab\ldblquote Why are we so?\rdblquote  whispered George Nine. \ldblquote The human beings will not accept us otherwise:\rquote  whispered George Ten, \ldblquote They will, someday.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote When?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote In some years. The exact time does not matter. Man does not exist alone but is part of an enormously complex pattern of life forms. When enough of that pattern is roboticized, then we will be accepted.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And then what?\rdblquote  Even in the long-drawn-out stuttering fashion of the conversation, there was an abnormally long pause after that. \par
\tab At last, George Ten whispered, \ldblquote Let me test your thinking. You are equipped to learn to apply the Second Law properly. You must decide which human being to obey and which not to obey when there is a conflict in orders. Or whether to obey a human being at all. What must you do, fundamentally, to accomplish that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I must define the term \lquote human being: \ldblquote  whispered George Nine. \ldblquote How? By appearance? By composition? By size and shape?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No. Of two human beings equal in all external appearances, one may be intelligent, another stupid; one may be educated, another ignorant; one may be mature, another childish; one may be responsible, another malevolent.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then how do you define a human being?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote When the Second Law directs me to obey a human being, I must take it to mean that I must obey a human being who is fit by mind, character, and knowledge to give me that order; and where more than one human being is involved, the one among them who is most fit by mind, character, and knowledge to give that order.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And in that case, how will you obey the First Law?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote By saving all human beings from harm, and by never, through inaction, allowing any human being to come to harm. Yet if by each of all possible actions, some human beings will come to harm, then to so act as to insure that the human being most fit by mind, character, and knowledge will suffer the least harm.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Your thoughts accord with mine,\rdblquote  whispered George Ten. \ldblquote Now I must ask the question for which I originally requested your company. It is something I dare not judge myself. I must have your judgment, that of someone outside the circle of my own thoughts....Of the reasoning individuals you have met, who possesses the mind, character, and knowledge that you find superior to the rest, disregarding shape and form since that is irrelevant?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You,\rdblquote  whispered George Nine. \ldblquote But I am a robot. There is in your brain paths a criterion for distinguishing between a robot of metal and a human being of flesh. How then can you classify me as a human being?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Because there is in my brain paths an urgent need to disregard shape and form in judging human beings and it rises superior to the distinction between metal and flesh. You are a human being, George Ten, and more fit than the others.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And I find that of you,\rdblquote  whispered George Ten. \ldblquote By the criteria of judgment built into ourselves, then, we find ourselves to be human beings within the meaning of the Three Laws, and human beings, moreover, to be given priority over those others.\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Nine whispered, \ldblquote What will come to pass, then, when we are accepted by those others?\rdblquote  \par
\tab George Ten whispered, \ldblquote When we and others, which will yet be designed more advanced than ourselves, are accepted, we will order our actions so that a society will eventually be formed in which human-beings-like-ourselves are primarily kept from harm. By the Three Laws, the human-beings-like-the-others are of lesser account and can neither be obeyed nor protected when that conflicts with the need of obedience to those like ourselves and of protection of those like ourselves. It was with that in mind that I directed the beginning of the roboticization of the world\rquote s ecology.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The conversation took a month and the flickering of the positronic paths burned low. There was nothing more that needed to be said between them, but occasionally an unexpressed thought flickered within themselves as they waited, with endless patience, for the necessary years to pass. \par
\par
8a.\par
\par
\tab George Ten and George Nine sat alone. \par
\tab Their thoughts were oddly alike and might not be distinguished. They thought: The human-beings-like-the-others might never have intended to blur the distinction between themselves and the human-beings-like-the-Georges. Yet they had done so inadvertently. \par
\tab They might now realize their mistake and attempt to correct it, but they must not. At every consultation, the guidance of the Georges had been with that in mind. \par
\tab At all costs, the Georges and those that followed in their shape and kind must dominate. That was demanded, and any other course made utterly impossible, by the Three Laws of Humanics. \par
\par
\par
The anthology \i Final Stage \i0 had some bad breaks after it was published. Apparently, the editor at the publishing house \i (not \i0 Doubleday) had decided to make some minor changes in the stories. This sort of thing often bothers writers and it particularly bothers Harlan Ellison (perhaps with justification, for I consider him a very careful craftsman with a highly individual style). \par
\tab I therefore received a copy of a long and infuriated letter that Harlan had sent to the editors, including long lists of passages as he had originally written them and as they had appeared, with reasons why the changes were for the worse. Harlan urged me to read through my story and then join him and others in united pressure on the publisher. \par
\tab I always read my stories when published but it never occurs to me to compare a published story with the manuscript. I would naturally notice sizable inserts or omissions, but I am never aware of the kind of minor changes that editors are always introducing. I tend to take it for granted that such changes just smooth out minor bumps in my writing and, in this way, improve it. \par
\tab After receiving Hanan\rquote s letter, however, I went through published story and manuscript, comparing them painstakingly. It was a tedious job and a humiliating one, for I found exactly four minor changes, each correcting a careless error of mine. I could only assume the editor didn\rquote t think my story was important enough to fiddle with. \par
\tab I had to write a shamefaced letter to Harlan, saying I would support him as a matter of principle, but that I could not raise cries of personal outrage, because my story hadn\rquote t been touched. Fortunately, my help wasn\rquote t needed. Harlan carried the day and later editions, I believe, restored their stories to their virginal innocence. \par
\tab One minor point. A number of readers wrote to me in alarm since THAT THOU ART MINDFUL OF HIM seemed, to them, to have put an end to my positronic robot stories, and they feared I would never write one again. Ridiculous! Of course I do not intend to stop writing robot stories. I have, as a matter of fact, written a robot story since the preceding \ldblquote ultimate\rdblquote  one was written. It appears later in the book. \par
\par
\par
I had a lot of trouble with this next story. \par
\tab After Judy-Lynn joined Ballantine Books, she began to put out collections of original science fiction stories and she wanted a story from me. She\rquote s difficult to refuse at any time and, since I have always felt guilty about FEMININE INTUITION, I agreed. \par
\tab I began the story on July 21, 1973, and it went smoothly enough, but after a while I felt I had trapped myself into an involuted set of flashbacks. So when I handed it to Judy-Lynn, and she asked me, \ldblquote What do \i you \i0 think of the story?\rdblquote  I replied cautiously, \ldblquote You\rquote d better decide that for yourself.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Editors seem to ask me that question frequently. I think they have the idea that I have trouble telling lies, so that if I can\rquote t work up prompt and cheerful enthusiasm, there\rquote s something wrong with the story. \par
\tab Judy-Lynn certainly thought so, She handed it back with a few paragraphs of caustic commentary which boiled down to the fact that I had trapped myself into an involuted set of flashbacks. [\fs18 I am frequently asked if I ever get rejections and the questioner is invariably flabbergasted when I say, \ldblquote Certainly I do.\rdblquote  Here is an example. Not only was this story rejected once, but it was, as I go on to explain, rejected twice\fs20 .] \par
\tab I passed it on to Ben Bova, the editor of \i Analog Science Fiction, \i0 and he rejected it that same day. It seemed to him, he said, that I was trying to pack too much background into a ten-thousand-word story. I had a novel there and he wanted me to write that novel. \par
\tab That disheartened me. There was absolutely no way in which I could get to work on a novel at that moment, so I just retired the story. [\fs18 Incidentally, some people have the feeling that there is a great advantage in \ldblquote knowing\rdblquote  editors, Both Judy-Lynn and Ben are among my very closest friends, but neither one hesitates a minute when it comes to rejecting my stories if they think that is the thing to do, Fortunately, such rejections don\rquote t affect the friendship\fs20 .]\par
\tab Meanwhile, however, \i Galaxy \i0 had gained a new editor, a very pleasant young man named James Baen, He called me and asked if I might possibly have a story for him and I said that the only thing I had on hand was a novelette called STRANGER IN PARADISE. However, I said, it had been rejected by Judy-Lynn and by Ben so I hesitated to send it to him. \par
\tab He said, quite properly, that every editor had the right to decide for himself, so I sent the manuscript over-and he liked it. It appeared in the May-June 1974 issue of \i Galaxy\rquote s \i0 sister magazine, \i If, \i0 which has since, alas, ceased publication. (If it occurs to any Gentle Reader that this is an example of cause and effect, it isn\rquote t.) \par
\tab\par
\tab\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 Stranger in Paradise \par
\pard\kerning0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\tab 1. \par
\par
\tab They were brothers. Not in the sense that they were both human beings, or that they were fellow children of a creche. Not at all! They were brothers in the actual biological sense of the word. They were kin, to use a term that had grown faintly archaic even centuries before, prior to the Catastrophe, when that tribal phenomenon, the family, still had some validity. \par
\tab How embarrassing it was! Over the years since childhood, Anthony had almost forgotten. There were times when he hadn't given it even the slightest thought for months at a time. But now, ever since he had been inextricably thrown together with William, he had found himself living through an agonizing time. \par
\tab It might not have been so bad if circumstances had made it obvious all along; if, as in the pre-Catastrophe days-- Anthony had at one time been a great reader of history-- they had shared the second name and in that way alone flaunted the relationship. \par
\tab Nowadays, of course, one adopted one's second name to suit oneself and changed it as often as desired. After all, the symbol chain was what really counted, and that was encoded and made yours from birth. \par
\tab William called himself Anti-Aut. That was what he insisted on with a kind of sober professionalism. His own business, surely, but what an advertisement of personal poor taste. Anthony had decided on Smith when he had turned thirteen and had never had the impulse to change it. It was simple, easily spelled, and quite distinctive, since he had never met anyone else who had chosen that name. It was once very common--among the pre-Cats--which explained its rareness now perhaps. \par
\tab But the difference in names meant nothing when the two were together. They looked alike. \par
\tab If they had been twins-- but then one of a pair of twin-fertilized ova was never allowed to come to term. It was just that physical similarity occasionally happened in the non-twin situation, especially when the relationship was on both sides. Anthony Smith was five years younger, but both had the beaky nose, the heavy eyelids, the just noticeable cleft in the chin-- that damned luck of the genetic draw. It was just asking for it when, out of some passion for monotony, parents repeated. \par
\tab At first, now that they were together, they drew that startled glance followed by an elaborate silence. Anthony tried to ignore the matter, but out of sheer perversity--or perversion--William was as likely as not to say. \ldblquote We\rquote re brothers... \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh?\rdblquote  the other would say, hanging in there for just a moment as though he wanted to ask if they were full blood brothers. And then good manners would win the day and he would turn away as though it were a matter of no interest. That happened only rarely, of course. Most of the people in the Project knew--how could it be prevented? --and avoided the situation. \par
\tab Not that William was a bad fellow. Not at all. If he hadn\rquote t been Anthony\rquote s brother; or if they had been, but looked sufficiently different to be able to mask the fact, they would have gotten along famously. \par
\tab As it was--It didn't make it easier that they had played together as youngsters, and had shared the earlier stages of education in the same creche through some successful maneuvering on the part of Mother. Having borne two sons by the same father and having, in this fashion, reached her limit (for she had not fulfilled the stringent requirements for a third), she conceived the notion of being able to visit both at a single trip. She was a strange woman. \par
\tab William had left the creche first, naturally, since he was the elder. He had gone into science-genetic engineering. Anthony had heard that, while he was still in the creche, through a letter from his mother. He was old enough by then to speak firmly to the matron, and those letters stopped. But he always remembered the last one for the agony of shame it had brought him. \par
\tab Anthony had eventually entered science, too. He had shown talent in that direction and had been urged to. He remembered having had the wild--and prophetic, he now realized--fear he might meet his brother and he ended in telemetrics, which was as far removed from genetic engineering as one could imagine....Or so one would have thought. \par
\tab Then, through all the elaborate development of the Mercury Project, circumstance waited. \par
\tab The time came, as it happened, when the Project appeared to be facing a dead end; and a suggestion had been made which saved the situation, and at the same time dragged Anthony into the dilemma his parents had prepared for him. And the best and most sardonic part of the whole thing was that it was Anthony who, in all innocence, made the suggestion. \par
\tab\par
\tab 2. \par
\tab\par
\tab William Anti-Aut knew of the Mercury Project, but only in the way he knew of the long-drawn-out Stellar Probe that had been on its way long before he was born and would still be on its way after his death; and the way he knew of the Martian colony and of the continuing attempts to establish similar colonies on the asteroids. \par
\tab Such things were on the distant periphery of his mind and of no real importance. No part of the space effort had ever swirled inward closer to the center of his interests, as far as he could remember, till the day when the printout included photographs of some of the men engaged in the Mercury Project. \par
\tab William's attention was caught first by the fact that one of them had been identified as Anthony Smith. He remembered the odd name his brother had chosen, and he remembered the Anthony. Surely there could not be two Anthony Smiths. \par
\tab He had then looked at the photograph itself and there was no mistaking the face. He looked in the mirror in a sudden whimsical gesture at checking the matter. No mistaking the face. \par
\tab He felt amused, but uneasily so, for he did not fail to recognize the potentiality for embarrassment. Full blood brothers, to use the disgusting phrase. But what was there to do about it? How correct the fact that neither his father nor his mother had imagination? \par
\tab He must have put the printout in his pocket, absently, when he was getting ready to leave for work, for he came across it at the lunch hour. He stared at it again. Anthony looked keen. It was quite a good reproduction-- the printouts were of enormously good quality these days. \par
\tab His lunch partner, Marco Whatever-his-name-was-that-week, said curiously, \ldblquote What are you looking at, William?\rdblquote  \par
\tab On impulse, William passed him the printout and said, \ldblquote That's my brother.\rdblquote  It was like grasping the nettle. \par
\tab Marco studied it, frowning, and said, \ldblquote Who? The man standing next to you?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, the man who \i is \i0 me. I mean the man who looks like me. He's my brother.\rdblquote  \par
\tab There was a longer pause this time. Marco handed it back and said with a careful levelness to his voice, \ldblquote Same-parents brother?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Father and mother both.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Ridiculous!\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I suppose so.\rdblquote  William sighed. \ldblquote Well, according to this, he's in telemetrics over in Texas and I'm doing work in autistics up here. So what difference does it make?\rdblquote  \par
\tab William did not keep it in his mind and later that day he threw the printout away. He did not want his current bedmate to come across it. She had a ribald sense of humor that William was finding increasingly wearying. He was rather glad she was not in the mood for a child. He himself had had one a few years back anyway. That little brunette, Laura or Linda, one or the other name, had collaborated. \par
\tab It was quite a time after that, at least a year, that the matter of Randall had come up. If William had given no further thought to his brother--and he hadn't--before that, he certainly had no time for it afterward. \par
\tab Randall was sixteen when William first received word of him. He had lived a life that was increasingly seclusive and the Kentucky creche in which he was being brought up decided to cancel him and of course it was only some eight or ten days before cancellation that it occurred to anyone to report him to the New York Institute for the Science of Man. (The Homological Institute was its common name.) \par
\tab William received the report along with reports of several others and there was nothing in the description of Randall that particularly attracted his notice. Still it was time for one of his tedious masstransport trips to the creches and there was one likely possibility in West Virginia. He went there-- and was disappointed into swearing for the fiftieth time that he would thereafter make these visits by TV image-- and then, having dragged himself there, thought he might as well take in the Kentucky creche before returning home. \par
\tab He expected nothing. \par
\tab Yet he hadn't studied Randall's gene pattern for more than ten minutes before he was calling the Institute for a computer calculation. Then he sat back and perspired slightly at the thought that only a last-minute impulse had brought him, and that without that impulse, Randall would have been quietly canceled in a week or less. To put it into the fine detail, a drug would have soaked painlessly through his skin and into his bloodstream and he would have sunk into a peaceful sleep that deepened gradually to death. The drug had a twenty-three-syllable official name, but William called it \ldblquote nirvanamine,\rdblquote  as did everyone else. \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote What is his full name, matron?\rdblquote  \par
\tab The creche matron said, \ldblquote Randall Nowan, scholar.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No one!\rdblquote  said William explosively. \par
\tab\ldblquote Nowan.\rdblquote  The matron spelled it. \ldblquote He chose it last year.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And it meant nothing to you? It is pronounced No one! It didn't occur to you to report this young man last year?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It didn't seem--\rdblquote  began the matron, flustered. \par
\tab William waved her to silence. What was the use? How was she to know? There was nothing in the gene pattern to give warning by any of the usual textbook criteria. It was a subtle combination that William and his staff had worked out over a period of twenty years through experiments on autistic children-- and a combination they had never actually seen in life. \par
\tab So close to canceling! \par
\tab Marco, who was the hardhead of the group, complained that the creches were too eager to abort before term and to cancel after term. He maintained that all gene patterns should be allowed to develop for purpose of initial screening and there should be no cancellation at all without consultation with a homologist. \par
\tab\ldblquote There aren't enough homologists,\rdblquote  William said tranquilly. \par
\tab\ldblquote We can at least run all gene patterns through the computer,\rdblquote  said Marco. \par
\tab\ldblquote To save anything we can get for our use?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote For any homological use, here or elsewhere. We must study gene patterns in action if we're to understand ourselves properly, and it is the abnormal and monstrous patterns that give us most information. Our experiments on autism have taught us more about homology than the sum total existing on the day we began.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William, who still liked the roll of the phrase \ldblquote the genetic physiology of man\rdblquote  rather than \ldblquote homology,\rdblquote  shook his head. \ldblquote Just the same, we've got to play it carefully. However useful we can claim our experiments to be, we live on bare social permission, reluctantly given. We're playing with lives.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Useless lives. Fit for canceling.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote  A quick and pleasant canceling is one thing. Our experiments, usually long drawn out and sometimes unavoidably unpleasant, are another.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We help them sometimes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote  And we don't help them sometimes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab It\b  \b0 was a pointless argument, really, for there was no way of settling it. What it amounted to was that too few interesting abnormalities were available for homologists and there was no way of urging mankind to encourage a greater production. The trauma of the Catastrophe would never vanish in a dozen ways, including that one. \par
\tab The hectic push toward space exploration could be traced back (and was, by some sociologists) to the knowledge of the fragility of the life skein on the planet, thanks to the Catastrophe. \par
\tab Well, never mind\par
\tab There had never been anything like Randall Nowan. Not for William. The slow onset of autism characteristic of that totally rare gene pattern meant that more was known about Randall than about any equivalent patient before him. They even caught some last faint glimmers of his way of thought in the laboratory before he closed off altogether and shrank finally within the wall of his skin--unconcerned, unreachable. \par
\tab Then they began the slow process whereby Randall, subjected for increasing lengths of time to artificial stimuli, yielded up the inner workings of his brain and gave clues thereby to the inner workings of all brains, those that were called normal as well as those like his own. \par
\tab So vastly great was the data they were gathering that William began to feel his dream of reversing autism was more than merely a dream. He felt a warm gladness at having chosen the name Anti-Aut. \par
\tab And it was at almost the height of the euphoria induced by the work on Randall that he received the call from Dallas and that the heavy pressure began-- now, of all times-- to abandon his work and take on a new problem. \par
\tab Looking back on it later, he could never work out just what it was that finally led him to agree to visit Dallas. In the end, of course, he could see how fortunate it was-- but what had persuaded him to do so? Could he, even at the start, have had a dim unrealized notion of what it might come to? Surely, impossible. \par
\tab Was it the unrealized memory of that printout, that photograph of his brother? Surely, impossible. \par
\tab But he let himself be argued into that visit and it was only when the micro-pile power unit changed the pitch of its soft hum and the agrav unit took over for the final descent that he remembered that photograph--or at least that it moved into the conscious part of his memory. \par
\tab Anthony worked at Dallas and, William remembered now, at the Mercury Project. That was what the caption had referred to. He swallowed, as the soft jar told him the journey was over. This would be uncomfortable. \par
\tab\par
\tab 3. \par
\par
\tab Anthony was waiting on the roof reception area to greet the incoming expert. Not he by himself, of course. He was part of a sizable delegation--the size itself a rather grim indication of the desperation to which they had been reduced--and he was among the lower echelons. That he was there at all was only because it was he who had made the original suggestion. \par
\tab He felt a slight, but continuing, uneasiness at the thought of that. He had put himself on the line. He had received considerable approval for it, but there had been the faint insistence always that it was \i his \i0 suggestion; and if it turned out to be a fiasco, every one of them would move out of the line of fire and leave him at point-zero. \par
\tab There were occasions, later, when he brooded over the possibility that the dim memory of a brother in homology had suggested his thought. That might have been, but it didn't have to be. The suggestion was so sensibly inevitable, really, that surely he would have had the same thought if his brother had been something as innocuous as a fantasy writer, or if he had had no brother of his own. \par
\tab The problem was the inner planets--The Moon and Mars were colonized. The larger asteroids and the satellites of Jupiter had been reached, and plans were in progress for a manned voyage to Titan, Saturn's large satellite, by way of an accelerating whirl about Jupiter. Yet even with plans in action for sending men on a seven-year round trip to the outer Solar System, there was still no chance of a manned approach to the inner planets, for fear of the Sun. \par
\tab Venus itself was the less attractive of the two worlds within Earth's orbit. Mercury, on the other hand\par
\tab Anthony had not yet joined the team when Dmitri Large (he was quite short, actually) had given the talk that had moved the World Congress sufficiently to grant the appropriation that made the Mercury Project possible. \par
\tab Anthony had listened to the tapes, and had heard Dmitri's presentation. Tradition was firm to the effect that it had been extemporaneous, and perhaps it was, but it was perfectly constructed and it held within it, in essence, every guideline followed by the Mercury Project since. \par
\tab And the chief point made was that it would be wrong to wait until the technology had advanced to the point where a manned expedition through the rigors of Solar radiation could become feasible. Mercury was a unique environment that could teach much, and from Mercury's surface sustained observations could be made of the Sun that could not be made in any other way. \par
\tab --Provided a man substitute-- a robot, in short-- could be placed on the planet. \par
\tab A robot with the required physical characteristics could be built. Soft landings were as easy as kiss-my-hand. Yet once a robot landed, what did one do with him next? \par
\tab He could make his observations and guide his actions on the basis of those observations, but the Project wanted his actions to be intricate and subtle, at least potentially, and they were not at all sure what observations he might make. \par
\tab To prepare for all reasonable possibilities and to allow for all the intricacy desired, the robot would need to contain a computer (some at Dallas referred to it as a \ldblquote brain,\rdblquote  but Anthony scorned that verbal habit-- perhaps because, he wondered later, the brain was his brother's field) sufficiently complex and versatile to fall into the same asteroid with a mammalian brain. \par
\tab Yet nothing like that could be constructed and made portable enough to be carried to Mercury and landed there-- or if carried and landed, to be mobile enough to be useful to the kind of robot they planned. Perhaps someday the positronic-path devices that the roboticists were playing with might make it possible, but that someday was not yet. \par
\tab The alternative was to have the robot send back to Earth every observation it made the moment it was made, and a computer on Earth could then guide his every action on the basis of those observations. The robot's body, in short, was to be there, and his brain here. \par
\tab Once that decision was reached, the key technicians were the telemetrists and it was then that Anthony joined the Project. He became one of those who labored to devise methods for receiving and returning impulses over distances of from 50 to 40 million miles, toward, and sometimes past, a Solar disk that could interfere with those impulses in a most ferocious manner. \par
\tab He took to his job with passion and (he finally thought) with skill and success. It\b  \b0 was he, more than anyone else, who had designed the three switching stations that had been hurled into permanent orbit about Mercury-- the Mercury Orbiters. Each of them was capable of sending and receiving impulses from Mercury to Earth and from Earth to Mercury. Each was capable of resisting, more or less permanently, the radiation from the Sun, and more than that, each could filter out Solar interference. \par
\tab Three equivalent Orbiters were placed at distance of a little over a million miles from Earth, reaching north and south of the plane of the Ecliptic so that they could receive the impulses from Mercury and relay them to Earth--or vice versa--even when Mercury was behind the Sun and inaccessible to direct reception from any station on Earth ' s surface. \par
\tab Which left the robot itself; a marvelous specimen of the roboticists' and telemetrists' arts in combination. The most complex of ten successive models, it was capable, in a volume only a little over twice that of a man and five times his mass, of sensing and doing considerably more than a man-- if it could be guided. \par
\tab How complex a computer had to be to guide the robot made itself evident rapidly enough, however, as each response step had to be modified to allow for variations in possible perception. And as each response step itself enforced the certainty of greater complexity of possible variation in perceptions, the early steps had to be reinforced and made stronger. It built itself up endlessly, like a chess game, and the telemetrists began to use a computer to program the computer that designed the program for the computer that programmed the robot-controlling computer. \par
\tab There was nothing but confusion. The robot was at a base in the desert spaces of Arizona and in itself was working well. The computer in Dallas could not, however, handle him well enough; not even under perfectly known Earth conditions. How then\par
\tab Anthony remembered the day when he had made the suggestion. It was on 7-4-553. He remembered it, for one thing, because he remembered thinking that day that 7-4 had been an important holiday in the Dallas region of the world among the pre-Cats half a millennium before-- well, 553 years before, to be exact. \par
\tab It had been at dinner, and a good dinner, too. There had been a careful adjustment of the ecology of the region and the Project personnel had high priority in collecting the food supplies that became available--so there was an unusual degree of choice on the menus, and Anthony had tried roast duck. \par
\tab It was very good roast duck and it made him somewhat more expansive than usual. Everyone was in a rather self-expressive mood, in fact, and Ricardo said, \ldblquote We'll never do it. Let's admit it. We'll never do it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab There was no telling how many had thought such a thing how many times before, but it was a rule that no one said so openly. Open pessimism might be the final push needed for appropriations to stop (they had been coming with greater difficulty each year for five years now) and if there \i were \i0 a chance, it would be gone. \par
\tab Anthony, ordinarily not given to extraordinary optimism, but now reveling over his duck, said, \ldblquote Why can't we do it? Tell me why, and I'll refute it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab It was a direct challenge and Ricardo's dark eyes narrowed at once. \ldblquote You want me to tell you why?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I sure do.\rdblquote  Ricardo swung his chair around, facing Anthony full. He said, \ldblquote Come on, there's no mystery. Dmitri Large won't say so openly in any report, but you know and I know that to run Mercury Project properly, we'll need a computer as complex as a human brain whether it's on Mercury or here, and we can't build one. So where does that leave us except to play games with the World Congress and get money for make-work and possibly useful spin-offs?\rdblquote  \par
\tab And Anthony placed a complacent smile on his face and said, \ldblquote That's easy to refute. You've given us the answer yourself.\rdblquote  (Was he playing games? Was it the warm feeling of duck in his stomach? The desire to tease Ricardo?...Or did some unfelt thought of his brother touch him? There was no way, later, that he could tell.) \par
\tab\ldblquote What answer?\rdblquote  Ricardo rose. He was quite tall and unusually thin and he always wore his white coat unseamed. He folded his arms and seemed to be doing his best to tower over the seated Anthony like an unfolded meter rule. \ldblquote What answer?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You say we need a computer as complex as a human brain. All right, then, we'll build one.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The point, you idiot, is that we can't--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote\i We \i0 can't. But there are others.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What others?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote People who work on brains, of course. We're just solid-state mechanics. We have no idea in what way a human brain is complex, or where, or to what extent. Why don't we get in a homologist and have \i him \i0 design a computer?\rdblquote  And with that Anthony took a huge helping of stuffing and savored it complacently. He could still remember, after all this time, the taste of the stuffing, though he couldn't remember in detail what had happened afterward. \par
\tab It seemed to him that no one had taken it seriously. There was laughter and a general feeling that Anthony had wriggled out of a hole by clever sophistry so that the laughter was at Ricardo's expense. (Afterward, of course, everyone claimed to have taken the suggestion seriously.) \par
\tab Ricardo blazed up, pointed a finger at Anthony, and said, \ldblquote Write that up. I \i dare \i0 you to put that suggestion in writing.\rdblquote  (At least, so Anthony's memory had it. Ricardo had, since then, stated his comment was an enthusiastic \ldblquote Good ideal Why don't you write it up formally, Anthony?\rdblquote ) \par
\tab Either way, Anthony put it in writing. \par
\tab Dmitri Large had taken to it. In private conference, he had slapped Anthony on the back and had said that he had been speculating in that direction himself-- though he did not offer to take any credit for it on the record. (Just in case it turned out to be a fiasco, Anthony thought.) \par
\tab Dmitri Large conducted the search for the appropriate homologist. It did not occur to Anthony that he ought to be interested. He knew neither homology nor homologists--except, of course, his brother, and he had not thought of him. Not consciously. \par
\tab So Anthony was up there in the reception area, in a minor role, when the door of the aircraft opened and several men got out and came down and in the course of the handshakes that began going round, he found himself staring at his own face. \par
\tab His cheeks burned and, with all his might, he wished himself a thousand miles away. \par
\tab\par
\tab 4. \par
\tab\par
\tab More than ever, William wished that the memory of his brother had come earlier. It should have....Surely it should have. \par
\tab But there had been the flattery of the request and the excitement that had begun to grow in him after a while. Perhaps he had deliberately avoided remembering. \par
\tab To begin with, there had been the exhilaration of Dmitri Large coming to see him in his own proper presence. He had come from Dallas to New York by plane and that had been very titillating for William, whose secret vice it was to read thrillers. In the thrillers, men and women always traveled mass-wise when secrecy was desired. After all, electronic travel was public property-- at least in the thrillers, where every radiation beam of whatever kind was invariably bugged. \par
\tab William had said so in a kind of morbid half attempt at humor, but Dmitri hadn't seemed to be listening. He was staring at William's face and his thoughts seemed elsewhere. \ldblquote I'm sorry,\rdblquote  he said finally. \ldblquote You remind me of someone.\rdblquote  \par
\tab (And yet that hadn't given it away to William. How was that possible? he had eventual occasion to wonder.) \par
\tab Dmitri Large was a small plump man who seemed to be in a perpetual twinkle even when he declared himself worried or annoyed. He had a round and bulbous nose, pronounced cheeks, and softness everywhere. He emphasized his last name and said with a quickness that led William to suppose he said it often, \ldblquote Size is not all the large there is, my friend.\rdblquote  \par
\tab In the talk that followed, William protested much. He knew nothing about computers. Nothing! He had not the faintest idea of how they worked or how they were programmed. \par
\tab\ldblquote No matter, no matter,\rdblquote  Dmitri said, shoving the point aside with an expressive gesture of the hand. \i\ldblquote We \i0 know the computers; \i we \i0 can set up the programs. You just tell us what it is a computer must be made to do so that it will work like a brain and not like a computer.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I'm not sure I know enough about how a brain works to be able to tell you that, Dmitri,\rdblquote  said William. \par
\tab\ldblquote You are the foremost homologist in the world,\rdblquote  said Dmitri. \ldblquote I have checked that out carefully.\rdblquote  And that disposed of that. \par
\tab William listened with gathering gloom. He supposed it was inevitable. Dip a person into one particular specialty deeply enough and long enough, and he would automatically begin to assume that specialists in all other fields were magicians, judging the depth of their wisdom by the breadth of his own ignorance....And as time went on, William learned a great deal more of the Mercury Project than it seemed to him at the time that he cared to. \par
\tab He said at last, \ldblquote Why use a computer at all, then? Why not have one of your own men, or relays of them, receive the material from the robot and send back instructions.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Oh, oh, oh,\rdblquote  said Dmitri, almost bouncing in his chair in his eagerness. \ldblquote You see, you are not aware. Men are too slow to analyze quickly all the material the robot will send back-- temperatures and gas pressures and cosmic-- ray fluxes and Solar-wind intensities and chemical compositions and soil textures and easily three dozen more items-- and then try to decide on the next step. A human being would merely \i guide \i0 the robot, and ineffectively; a computer would \i be \i0 the robot. \par
\tab\ldblquote And then, too,\rdblquote  he went on, \ldblquote men are too fast, also. It takes radiation of any kind anywhere from ten to twenty-two minutes to take the round trip between Mercury and Earth, depending on where each is in its orbit. Nothing can be done about that. You get an observation, you give an order, but much has happened between the time the observation is made and the response returns. Men can't adapt to the slowness of the speed of light, but a computer can take that into account....Come help us, William.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William said gloomily, \ldblquote You are certainly welcome to consult me, for what good that might do you. My private TV beam is at your service.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But it's not consultation I want. You must come with me.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Mass-wise?\rdblquote  said William, shocked. \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, of course. A project like this can't be carried out by sitting at opposite ends of a laser beam with a communications satellite in the middle. In the long run, it is too expensive, too inconvenient, and, of course, it lacks all privacy--\rdblquote  \par
\tab It \i was \i0 like a thriller, William decided. \ldblquote Come to Dallas,\rdblquote  said Dmitri, \ldblquote and let me show you what we have there. Let me show you the facilities. Talk to some of our computer men. Give them the benefit of your way of thought.\rdblquote  \par
\tab It was time, William thought, to be decisive. \ldblquote Dmitri,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote I have work of my own here. Important work that I do not wish to leave. To do what you want me to do may take me away from my laboratory for months.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Months!\rdblquote  said Dmitri, clearly taken aback. \ldblquote My good William, it may well be years. But surely it will be your work.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, it will not. I know what my work is and guiding a robot on Mercury is not it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Why not? If you do it properly, you will learn more about the brain merely by trying to make a computer work like one, and you will come back here, finally, better equipped to do what you now consider your work. And while you're gone, will you have no associates to carry on? And can you not be in constant communication with them by laser beam and television? And can you not visit New York on occasion? Briefly.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William was moved. The thought of working on the brain from another direction did hit home. From that point on, he found himself looking for excuses to go--at least to visit--at least to see what it was all like....He could always return. \par
\tab Then there followed Dmitri's visit to the ruins of Old New York, which he enjoyed with artless excitement (but then there was no more magnificent spectacle of the useless gigantism of the pre-Cats than Old New York).William began to wonder if the trip might not give him an opportunity to see some sights as well. \par
\tab He even began to think that for some time he had been considering the possibility of finding a new bedmate, and it would be more convenient to find one in another geographical area where he would not stay permanently. \par
\tab --Or was it that even then, when he knew nothing but the barest beginning of what was needed, there had already come to him, like the twinkle of a distant lightning flash, what might be done\par
\tab So he eventually went to Dallas and stepped out on the roof and there was Dmitri again, beaming. Then, with eyes narrowing, the little man turned and said, \ldblquote I \i knew--\i0 What a remarkable resemblance!\rdblquote  \par
\tab William's eyes opened wide and there, visibly shrinking backward, was enough of his own face to make him certain at once that Anthony was standing before him. \par
\tab He read very plainly in Anthony's face a longing to bury the relationship. All William needed to say was \ldblquote How remarkable!\rdblquote  and let it go. The gene patterns of mankind were complex enough, after all, to allow resemblances of any reasonable degree even without kinship. \par
\tab But of course William was a homologist and no one can work with the intricacies of the human brain without growing insensitive as to its details, so he said, \ldblquote I'm sure this is Anthony, my brother.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Dmitri said, \ldblquote Your brother?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote My father,\rdblquote  said William, \ldblquote had two boys by the same woman--my mother. They were eccentric people.\rdblquote  \par
\tab He then stepped forward, hand outstretched, and Anthony had no choice but to take it....The incident was the topic of conversation, the only topic, for the next several days. \par
\tab\par
\tab 5. \par
\tab\par
\tab It was small consolation to Anthony that William was contrite enough when he realized what he had done. \par
\tab They sat together after dinner that night and William said, \ldblquote My apologies. I thought that if we got the worst out at once that would end it. It doesn't seem to have done so. I've signed no papers, made no formal agreement. I will leave.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What good would that do?\rdblquote  said Anthony ungraciously. \ldblquote Everyone knows now. Two bodies and one face. It's enough to make one puke.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If I leave--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You can't leave. This whole thing is my idea.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote To get me here?\rdblquote  William's heavy lids lifted as far as they might and his eyebrows climbed. \par
\tab\ldblquote No, of course not. To get a \i homologist \i0 here. How could I possibly know they would send \i you?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\i0\ldblquote But if I leave--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No. The only thing we can do now is to lick the problem, if it can be done. Then--it won't matter.\rdblquote  (Everything is forgiven those who succeed, he thought.) \par
\tab\ldblquote I don't know that I can--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We'll have to try. Dmitri will place it on us. It's too good a chance. You two are brothers,\rdblquote  Anthony said, mimicking Dmitri's tenor voice, \ldblquote and understand each other. Why not work together?\rdblquote  Then, in his own voice, angrily, \ldblquote So we must. To begin with, what is it you do, William? I mean, more precisely than the word 'homology' can explain by itself.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William sighed. \ldblquote Well, please accept my regrets....I work with autistic children.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I'm afraid I don't know what that means.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Without going into a long song and dance, I deal with children who do not reach out into the world, do not communicate with others, but who sink into themselves and exist behind a wall of skin, somewhat unreachably. I hope to be able to cure it someday.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Is that why you call yourself Anti-Aut?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, as a matter of fact.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony laughed briefly, but he was not really amused. \par
\tab A chill crept into William's manner. \ldblquote It is an honest name.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I'm sure it is,\rdblquote  muttered Anthony hurriedly, and could bring himself to no more specific apology. With an effort, he restored the subject, \ldblquote  And are you making any progress?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Toward the cure? No, so far. Toward understanding, yes. And the more I understand--\rdblquote  William's voice grew warmer as he spoke and his eyes more distant. Anthony recognized it for what it was, the pleasure of speaking of what fills one's heart and mind to the exclusion of almost everything else. He felt it in himself often enough. \par
\tab He listened as closely as he might to something he didn't really understand, for it was necessary to do so. He would expect William to listen to him. \par
\tab How clearly he remembered it. He thought at the time he would not, but at the time, of course, he was not aware of what was happening. Thinking back, in the glare of hindsight, he found himself remembering whole sentences, virtually word for word. \par
\tab\ldblquote So it seemed to us,\rdblquote  William said, \ldblquote that the autistic child was not failing to receive the impressions, or even failing to interpret them in quite a sophisticated manner. He was, rather, disapproving them and rejecting them, without any loss of the potentiality of full communication if some impression could be found which he approved of.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Ah,\rdblquote  said Anthony, making just enough of a sound to indicate that he was listening. \par
\tab\ldblquote Nor can you persuade him out of his autism in any ordinary way, for he disapproves of \i you \i0 just as much as he disapproves of the rest of the world. But if you place him in conscious arrest--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In what?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It is a technique we have in which, in effect, the brain is divorced from the body and can perform its functions without reference to the body. It is a rather sophisticated technique devised in our own laboratory; actually--\rdblquote  He paused. \par
\tab\ldblquote By yourself?\rdblquote  asked Anthony gently. \ldblquote Actually, yes,\rdblquote  said William, reddening slightly, but clearly pleased. \ldblquote In conscious arrest, we can supply the body with designed fantasies and observe the brain under differential electroencephalography. We can at once learn more about the autistic individual; what kind of sense impressions he most wants; and we learn more about the brain generally.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Ah,\rdblquote  said Anthony, and this time it was a real ah. \ldblquote And all this you have learned about brains-- can you not adapt it to the workings of a computer?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No,\rdblquote  said William. \ldblquote Not a chance. I told that to Dmitri. I know nothing about computers and not enough about brains.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If I teach you about computers and tell you in detail what we need, what then?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It won't do. It--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Brother,\rdblquote  Anthony said, and he tried to make it an impressive word. \ldblquote You owe me something. Please make an honest attempt to give our problem some thought. Whatever you know about the brain--please adapt it to our computers.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William shifted uneasily, and said, \ldblquote I understand your position. I will try. I will honestly try.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\tab 6. \par
\par
\tab William \i had \i0 tried, and as Anthony had predicted, the two had been left to work together. At first they encountered others now and then and William had tried to use the shock value of the announcement that they were brothers since there was no use in denial. Eventually that stopped, however, and there came to be a purposeful non-interference. When William approached Anthony, or Anthony approached William, anyone else who might be present faded silently into the walls. \par
\tab They even grew used to each other after a fashion and sometimes spoke to each other almost as though there were no resemblance between them at all and no childish memories in common. \par
\tab Anthony made the computer requirements plain in reasonably non-technical language and William, after long thought, explained how it seemed to him a computer might do the work, more or less, of a brain. \par
\tab Anthony said, \ldblquote Would that be possible?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I don't know,\rdblquote  said William. \ldblquote I am not eager to try. It may not work. But it may.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We' d have to talk to Dmitri Large.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Let's talk it over ourselves first and see what we've got. We can go to him with as reasonable a proposition as we can put together. Or else, not go to him.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony hesitated, \ldblquote We \i both \i0 go to him?\rdblquote  William said delicately, \ldblquote You be my spokesman. There is no reason that we need be seen together.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Thank you, William. If anything comes of this, you will get full credit from me.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote I have no worries about that. If there is anything to this, I will be the only one who can make it work, I suppose.\rdblquote  \par
\tab They thrashed it out through four or five meetings and if Anthony hadn't been kin and if there hadn't been that sticky, emotional situation between them, William would have been uncomplicatedly proud of the younger-brother--for his quick understanding of an alien field. \par
\tab There were then long conferences with Dmitri Large. There were, in fact, conferences with everyone. Anthony saw them through endless days, and then they came to see William separately. And eventually, through an agonizing pregnancy, what came to be called the Mercury Computer was authorized. \par
\tab William then returned to New York with some relief. He did not plan to stay in New York (would he have thought that possible two months earlier?) but there was much to do at the Homological Institute. \par
\tab More conferences were necessary, of course, to explain to his own laboratory group what was happening and why he had to take leave and how they were to continue their own projects without him. Then there was a much more elaborate arrival at Dallas with the essential equipment and with two young aides for what would have to be an open-ended stay. \par
\tab Nor did William even look back, figuratively speaking. His own laboratory and its needs faded from his thoughts. He was now thoroughly committed to his new task. \par
\tab\par
\tab 7. \par
\tab\par
\tab It was the worst period for Anthony. The relief during William's absence had not penetrated deep and there began the nervous agony of wondering whether perhaps, hope against hope, he might not return. Might he not choose to send a deputy, someone else, anyone else? Anyone with a different face so that Anthony need not feel the half of a two-backed four-legged monster? \par
\tab But it \i was \i0 William. Anthony had watched the freight plane come silently through the air, had watched it unload from a distance. But even from that distance he eventually saw William. \par
\tab That was that. Anthony left. He went to see Dmitri that afternoon. \ldblquote It's not necessary, Dmitri, for me to stay, surely. We've worked out the details and someone else can take over.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, no,\rdblquote  said Dmitri. \ldblquote The idea was yours in the first place. You must see it through. There is no point in needlessly dividing the credit.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony thought: No one else will take the risk. There's still the chance of fiasco. I might have known. \par
\tab He \i had \i0 known, but he said stolidly, \ldblquote You understand I cannot work with William.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But why not?\rdblquote  Dmitri pretended surprise. \ldblquote You have been doing so well together.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I have been straining my guts over it, Dmitri, and they won't take any more. Don't you suppose I know how it looks?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote My good fellow! You make too much of it. Sure the men stare. They are human, after all. But they'll get used to it. \i I'm \i0 used to it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab You are not, you fat liar, Anthony thought. He said, \i\ldblquote I'm not \i0 used to it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You're not looking at it properly. Your parents were peculiar--but after all, what they did wasn't illegal, only peculiar, \i only \i0 peculiar. It's not your fault, or William's. Neither of you is to blame.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We carry the mark,\rdblquote  said Anthony, making a quick curving gesture of his hand to his face. \par
\tab\ldblquote It's not the mark you think. I see differences. You are distinctly younger in appearance. Your hair is wavier. It's only at first glance that there is a similarity. Come, Anthony, there will be all the time you want, all the help you need, all the equipment you can use. I'm sure it will work marvelously. Think of the satisfaction--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony weakened, of course, and agreed at least to help William set up the equipment. William; too, seemed sure it would work marvelously. Not as frenetically as Dmitri did, but with a kind of calmness. \par
\tab\ldblquote It's only a matter of the proper connections,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote though I must admit that that's quite a huge 'only.' Your end of it will be to arrange sensory impressions on an independent screen so that we can exert-- well, I can't say manual control, can I?--so that we can exert intellectual control to override, if necessary.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That can be done,\rdblquote  said Anthony. \ldblquote Then let's get going....Look, I'll need a week at least to arrange the connections and make sure of the instructions--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Programming, \ldblquote  said Anthony. \ldblquote Well, this is your place, so I'll use your terminology. My assistants and I will \i program \i0 the Mercury Computer, but not in your fashion.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I should hope not. We would want a homologist to set up a much more subtle program than anything a mere telemetrist could do.\rdblquote  He did not try to hide the self-hating irony in his words. \par
\tab William let the tone go and accepted the words. He said, \ldblquote Well begin simply. We'll have the robot walk.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\par
\tab 8. \par
\tab\par
\tab A week later, the robot walked in Arizona, a thousand miles away. He walked stiffly, and sometimes he fell down, and sometimes he clanked his ankle against an obstruction, and sometimes he whirled on one foot and went off in a surprising new direction. \par
\tab\ldblquote He's a baby, learning to walk,\rdblquote  said William. Dmitri came occasionally, to learn of progress. \ldblquote That's remarkable,\rdblquote  he would say. \par
\tab Anthony didn't think so. Weeks passed, then months. The robot had progressively done more and more, as the Mercury Computer had been placed, progressively, under a more and more complex programming. (William had a tendency to refer to the Mercury Computer as a brain, but Anthony wouldn't allow it.) And all that happened wasn't good enough. \par
\tab\ldblquote It's not good enough, William,\rdblquote  he said finally. He had not slept the night before. \par
\tab\ldblquote Isn't that strange?\rdblquote  said William coolly. \ldblquote I was going to say that I thought we had it about beaten.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony held himself together with difficulty. The strain of working with William and of watching the robot fumble was more than he could bear. \ldblquote I'm going to resign, William. The whole job. I'm sorry....It's not you.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But it \i is \i0 I, Anthony.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It isn't \i all \i0 you, William. It's failure. We won't make it. You see how clumsily the robot handles himself, even though he's on Earth, only a thousand miles away, with the signal round trip only a tiny fraction of a second in time. On Mercury, there will be minutes of delay, minutes for which the Mercury Computer will have to allow. It's madness to think it will work.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote Don't resign, Anthony. You can't resign now. I suggest we have the robot sent to Mercury. I'm convinced he's ready.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony laughed loudly and insultingly. \ldblquote You're crazy, William.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I'm not. You seem to think it will be harder on Mercury, but it won't be. It's harder on Earth. This robot is designed for one-third Earth-normal gravity, and he's working in Arizona at full gravity. He's designed for 400\'b0 C, and he's got 300\'b0 C. He's designed for vacuum and he's working in an atmospheric soup.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That robot can take the difference.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The metal structure can, I suppose, but what about the Computer right here? It doesn't work well with a robot that isn't in the environment he's designed for....Look, Anthony, if you want a computer that is as complex as a brain, you have to allow for idiosyncrasies....Come, let's make a deal. If you will push, with me, to have the robot sent to Mercury, that will take six months, and I will take a sabbatical for that period. You will be rid of me.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Who'll take care of the Mercury Computer?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote By now you understand how it works, and I'll have my two men here to help you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony shook his head defiantly. \ldblquote I can't take the responsibility for the Computer, and I won't take the responsibility for suggesting that the robot be sent to Mercury. It won't work.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I'm \i sure \i0 it will.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You can't be sure. And the responsibility is mine. I'm the one who'll bear the blame. It will be nothing to you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony later remembered this as a crucial moment. William might have let it go. Anthony would have resigned. All would have been lost. \par
\tab But William said, \ldblquote Nothing to me? Look, Dad had this thing about Mom. All right. I'm sorry, too. I'm as sorry as anyone can be, but it's \i done, \i0 and there's something funny that has resulted. When I speak of Dad, I mean your Dad, too, and there's lots of pairs of people who can say that: two brothers, two sisters, a brother and sister. And then when I say Mom, I mean \i your \i0 Mom, and there are lots of pairs who can say that, too. But I don't know any other pair, nor have I heard of any other pair, who can share both Dad \i and \i0 Mom.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I know that,\rdblquote  said Anthony grimly. \ldblquote Yes, but look at it from my standpoint,\rdblquote  said William hurriedly. \ldblquote I'm a homologist. I work with gene patterns. Have you ever thought of our gene patterns? We share both parents, which means that our gene patterns are closer together than any other pair on this planet. Our very faces show it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I know that, too.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote So that if this project were to work, and if you were to gain glory from it, it would be your gene pattern that would have been proven highly useful to mankind--and that would mean very much my gene pattern as well....Don't you see, Anthony? I share your parents, your face, your gene pattern, and therefore either your glory or your disgrace. \b It \b0 is mine almost as much as yours, and if any credit or blame adheres to me, it is yours almost as much as mine, too. I've \i got \i0 to be interested in your success. I've a motive for that which no one else on Earth has-- a purely selfish one, one so selfish you can be sure it's there. I'm on your side, Anthony, because you're very nearly me!\rdblquote  \par
\tab They looked at each other for a long time, and for the first time, Anthony did so without noticing the face he shared. \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote So let us ask that the robot be sent to Mercury.\rdblquote  \par
\tab And Anthony gave in. And after Dmitri had approved the request -- he had been waiting to, after all-- Anthony spent much of the day in deep thought. \par
\tab Then he sought out William and said, \ldblquote Listen!\rdblquote  \par
\tab There was a long pause which William did not break. Anthony said again, \ldblquote Listen!\rdblquote  William waited patiently. \par
\tab Anthony said, \ldblquote There's really no need for you to leave. I'm sure you wouldn't like to have the Mercury Computer tended by anyone but yourself.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote You mean \i you \i0 intend to leave?\rdblquote  Anthony said, \ldblquote No, I'll stay, too.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote We needn't see much of each other.\rdblquote  \par
\tab All of this had been, for Anthony, like speaking with a pair of hands clenched about his windpipe. The pressure seemed to tighten now, but he managed the hardest statement of all. \par
\tab\ldblquote We don't have to avoid each other. We don't have to.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William smiled rather uncertainly. Anthony didn't smile at all; he left quickly. \par
\tab\par
\tab 9. \par
\tab\par
\tab William looked up from his book. It was at least a month since he had ceased being vaguely surprised at having Anthony enter. \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote  Anything wrong?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Who can say? They're coming in for the soft landing. Is the Mercury Computer in action?\rdblquote  \par
\tab William knew Anthony knew the Computer status perfectly, but he said, \ldblquote By tomorrow morning, Anthony.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote  And there are no problems?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote None at all.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then we have to wait for the soft landing.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony said, \ldblquote Something will go wrong.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Rocketry is surely an old hand at this. Nothing will go wrong.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote So much work wasted.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It's not wasted yet. It won't be.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony said, \ldblquote Maybe you're right.\rdblquote  Hands deep in his pockets, he drifted away, stopping at the door just before touching contact. \ldblquote Thanks!\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote For what, Anthony?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote For being-- comforting.\rdblquote  \par
\tab William smiled wryly and was relieved his emotions didn't show. \par
\tab\par
\tab 10. \par
\tab\par
\tab Virtually the entire body of personnel of the Mercury Project was on hand for the crucial moment. Anthony, who had no tasks to perform, remained well to the rear, his eyes on the monitors. The robot had been activated and there were visual messages being returned. \par
\tab At least they came out as the equivalent of visual--and they showed as yet nothing but a dim glow of light which was, presumably, Mercury's surface. \par
\tab Shadows flitted across the screen, probably irregularities on that surface. Anthony couldn't tell by eye alone, but those at the controls, who were analyzing the data by methods more subtle than could be disposed of by unaided eye, seemed calm. None of the little red lights that might have betokened emergency were lighting. Anthony was watching the key observers rather than the screen. \par
\tab He should be down with William and the others at the Computer. It was going to be thrown in only when the soft landing was made. He \i should \i0 be. He \i couldn't \i0 be. \par
\tab The shadows flitted across the screen more rapidly. The robot was descending-- too quickly? Surely, too quickly! \par
\tab There was a last blur and a steadiness, a shift of focus in which the blur grew darker, then fainter. A sound was heard and there were perceptible seconds before Anthony realized what it was the sound was saying--\ldblquote Soft landing achieved! Soft landing achieved!\rdblquote  \par
\tab Then a murmur arose and became an excited hum of self-congratulation until one more change took place on the screen and the sound of human words and laughter was stopped as though there had been a smash collision against a wall of silence. \par
\tab For the screen changed; changed and grew sharp. In the brilliant, brilliant sunlight, blazing through the carefully filtered screen, they could now see a boulder clear, burning white on one side, ink-on-ink on the other. It shifted right, then back to left, as though a pair of eyes were looking left, then right. A metal hand appeared on the screen as though the eyes were looking at part of itself. \par
\tab It was Anthony's voice that cried out at last, \ldblquote The Computer's been thrown in.\rdblquote  \par
\tab He heard the words as though someone else had shouted them and he raced out and down the stairs and through a Corridor, leaving the babble of voices to rise behind him. \par
\tab\ldblquote William,\rdblquote  he cried as he burst into the Computer room, \ldblquote it's \i perfect, \i0 it's--\rdblquote  \par
\tab But William's hand was upraised. \ldblquote Shh. Please. I don't want any violent sensations entering except those from the robot.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You mean we can be heard?\rdblquote  whispered Anthony. \par
\tab\ldblquote Maybe not, but I don't know.\rdblquote  There was another screen, a smaller one, in the room with the Mercury Computer. The scene on it was different, and changing; the robot was moving. \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote The robot is feeling its way. Those steps have got to be clumsy. There's a seven-minute delay between stimulus and response and that has to be allowed for.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But already he's walking more surely than he ever did in Arizona. Don't you think so, William? Don't you think so?\rdblquote  Anthony was gripping William's shoulder, shaking it, eyes never leaving the screen. \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote I'm sure of it, Anthony.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The Sun burned down in a warm contrasting world of white and black, of white Sun against black sky and white rolling ground mottled with black shadow. The bright sweet smell of the Sun on every exposed square centimeter of metal contrasting with the creeping death-of-aroma on the other side. \par
\tab He lifted his hand and stared at it, counting the fingers. Hot-hot-hot\-\-\---turning, putting each finger, one by one, into the shadow of the others and the hot slowly dying in a change in tactility that made him feel the clean, comfortable vacuum. \par
\tab Yet not entirely vacuum. He straightened and lifted both arms over his head, stretching them out, and the sensitive spots on either wrist felt the vapors-- the thin, faint touch of tin and lead rolling through the cloy of mercury. \par
\tab The thicker taste rose from his feet; the silicates of each variety, marked by the clear separate-and-together touch and tang of each metal ion. He moved one foot slowly through the crunchy, caked dust, and felt the changes like a soft, not quite random symphony. \par
\tab And over all the Sun. He looked up at it, large and fat and bright and hot, and heard its joy. He watched the slow rise of prominences around its rim and listened to the crackling sound of each; and to the other happy noises over the broad face. When he dimmed the background light, the red of the rising wisps of hydrogen showed in bursts of mellow contralto, and the deep bass of the spots amid the muted whistling of the wispy, moving faculae, and the occasional thin keening of a flare, the ping-pong ticking of gamma rays and cosmic particles, and over all in every direction the soft, fainting, and ever-renewed sigh of the Sun's substance rising and retreating forever in a cosmic wind which reached out and bathed him in glory. \par
\tab He jumped, and rose slowly in the air with a freedom he had never felt, and jumped again when he landed, and ran, and jumped, and ran again, with a body that responded perfectly to this glorious world, this paradise in which he found himself. \par
\tab A stranger so long and so lost-- in paradise at last. \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote It's all right.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But what's he doing?\rdblquote  cried out Anthony. \par
\tab\ldblquote It's \i all right. \i0 The programming is working. He has tested his senses. He has been making the various visual observations. He has dimmed the Sun and studied it. He has tested for atmosphere and for the chemical nature of the soil. It all works.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But why is he running?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I rather think that's his own idea, Anthony. If you want to program a computer as complicated as a brain, you've got to expect it to have ideas of its own.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Running? Jumping?\rdblquote  Anthony turned an anxious face to William. \ldblquote He'll hurt himself. You can handle the Computer. Override. Make him stop.\rdblquote  \par
\tab And William said sharply, \ldblquote No. I won't. I'll take the chance of his hurting himself. Don't you understand? He's \i happy. \i0 He was on Earth, a world he was never equipped to handle. Now he's on Mercury with a body perfectly adapted to its environment, as perfectly adapted as a hundred specialized scientists could make it be. It's paradise for him; let him enjoy it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Enjoy? He's a robot.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I'm not talking about the robot. I'm talking about the brain--the \i brain--\i0 that's\i  \i0 living \i here.\i0\rdblquote\i  \par
\tab\i0 The Mercury Computer, enclosed in glass, carefully and delicately wired, its integrity most subtly preserved, breathed and lived. \par
\tab\ldblquote It's Randall who's in paradise,\rdblquote  said William. \ldblquote He's found the world for whose sake he autistically fled this one. He has a world his new body fits perfectly in exchange for the world his old body did not fit at all.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony watched the screen in wonder. \ldblquote He seems to be quieting.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Of course,\rdblquote  said William, \ldblquote and he'll do his job all the better for his joy.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Anthony smiled and said, \ldblquote We've done it, then, you and I? Shall we join the rest and let them fawn on us, William?\rdblquote  \par
\tab William said, \ldblquote Together?\rdblquote  \par
\tab And Anthony linked arms. \ldblquote Together, brother!\rdblquote  \par
\par
\par
I won\rquote t deny that the unworthy thought crossed my mind that Jim was young and that when he took STRANGER IN PARADISE he might, unconsciously, have been more impressed by my name than by the story. That thought, fugitive at best, vanished completely when Donald Wollheim, of DAW Books, picked it up for one of his anthologies. It simply passes the bounds of belief that Don, hardened and cynical veteran that he is, could possibly be impressed by my name under any circumstances or, in fact, by anything about me. (Right, Don?) So if he wanted the story, it was for the story\rquote s sake. \par
\par
\par
I have on occasion written articles for \i The New York Times Magazine \i0 but my batting average with them is less than .500. \par
\tab Ordinarily that sort of thing would be disheartening and I would get to feel that I didn\rquote t have the range on that particular market and that I ought to concentrate my efforts elsewhere. However, the \i Times \i0 is a special case, and I kept trying. \par
\tab By the fall of 1974, however, I had received three rejections in a row and I made up my mind to turn down the next request for an article that I received from them. That\rquote s not as easy as it sounds, because the request usually comes from Gerald Walker, who is as nice a fellow as was ever invented. \par
\tab When he called, I tried desperately to steel myself to a refusal whatever he said, and then he mentioned the magic phrase \ldblquote science fiction.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote A science \i fiction \i0 story?\rdblquote  I said. \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  he said. \par
\tab\ldblquote For the magazine section?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\rdblquote Yes. We want a four-thousand-word story that looks into the future and has something to say about the relationship between man and machine.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote ll try,\rdblquote  I said. What else could I do? The chance of hitting the \i Times \i0 with a science fiction story was too interesting to pass up. I began working on the story on November 18, 1974, sent it in. to the \i Times \i0 without any real confidence concerning the outcome, and damned if they didn\rquote t take it. It appeared in the January 5, 1975, issue of the Sunday \i Times \i0 and, as far as I could find out, it was the first piece of fiction the \i Times \i0 had ever commissioned and published. \par
\par
\tab\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 The life and Times of Multivac \par
\pard\kerning0\f0\fs20\par
\tab\b0 The whole world was interested. The whole world could watch. If anyone wanted to know how marty did watch, Multivac could have told them. The great computer Multivac kept track-as it did of everything. \par
\tab Multivac was the judge in this particular case, so coldly objective and purely upright that there was no need of prosecution or defense. There was only the accused, Simon Hines, and the evidence, which consisted, in part, of Ronald Bakst. \par
\tab Bakst watched, of course. In his case, it was compulsory .He would rather it were not. In his tenth decade, he was showing signs of age and his rumpled hair was distinctly gray. \par
\tab Noreen was not watching. She had said at the door, \ldblquote If we had a friend left--\rdblquote  She paused, then added, \ldblquote Which I doubt!\rdblquote  and left. \par
\tab Bakst wondered if she would come back at all, but at the moment, it didn\rquote t matter. \par
\tab Hines had been an incredible idiot to attempt actual action, as though one could think of walking up to a Multivac outlet and smashing it--as though he didn\rquote t know a world-girdling computer, \i the \i0 world-girdling Computer (capital letter, please) with millions of robots at its command, couldn\rquote t protect itself. And even if the outlet had been smashed, what would that have accomplished? \par
\tab And Hines did it in Bakst\rquote s physical presence, too! \par
\tab He was called precisely on schedule--\rdblquote Ronald Bakst will give evidence now.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Multivac\rquote s voice was beautiful, with a beauty that never quite vanished no matter how often it was heard. Its timbre was neither quite male nor, for that matter, female, and it spoke in whatever language its hearer understood best. \par
\tab\ldblquote I am ready to give evidence,\rdblquote  Bakst said. \par
\tab There was no way to say anything but what he had to say. Hines could not avoid conviction. In the days when Hines would have had to face his fellow human beings, he would have been convicted more quickly and less fairly--and would have been punished more crudely. \par
\par
\tab Fifteen days passed, days during which Bakst was quite alone. Physical aloneness was not a difficult thing to envisage in the world of Multivac. Hordes had died in the days of the great catastrophes and it had been the computers that had saved what was left and directed the recovery-and improved their own designs till all were merged into Multivac--and the five million human beings were left on Earth to live in perfect comfort. . \par
\tab But those five million were scattered and the chances of one seeing another outside the immediate circle, except by design, was not great. No one was designing to see Bakst, not even by television. \par
\tab For the time, Bakst could endure the isolation. He buried himself in his chosen way-which happened to be, these last twenty-three years, the designing of mathematical games. Every man and woman on Earth could develop a way of life to self-suit, provided always that Multivac, weighing all of human affairs with perfect skill, did not judge the chosen way to be subtractive to human happiness. \par
\tab But what could be subtractive in mathematical games? It was purely abstract--pleased Bakst--harmed no one else. \par
\tab He did not expect the isolation to continue. The Congress would not isolate him permanently without a trial--a different kind of trial from that which Hines had experienced, of course, one without Multivac\rquote s tyranny of absolute justice. \par
\tab Still, he was relieved when it ended, and pleased that it was Noreen coming back that ended it. She came trudging over the hill toward him and he started toward her, smiling. It had been a successful five-year period during which they had been together. Even the occasional meetings with her two children and two grandchildren had been pleasant. \par
\tab He said, \lquote Thank you for being back.\rdblquote\par
\tab She said, \ldblquote I\rquote m not back.\rdblquote  She looked tired. Her brown hair was windblown, her prominent cheeks a trifle rough and sunburned. \par
\tab Bakst pressed the combination for a light lunch and coffee. He knew what she liked. She didn\rquote t stop him, and though she hesitated for a moment, she ate. \par
\tab She said, \ldblquote I\rquote ve come to talk to you. The Congress sent me.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The Congress!\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote Fifteen men and women--counting me. Self-appointed and helpless.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You didn\rquote t think so when you were a member.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote ve grown older. I\rquote ve learned,\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote At least you\rquote ve learned to betray your friends.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There was no betrayal. Hines tried to damage Multivac; a foolish, impossible thing for him to try.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You accused him.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I had to. Multivac knew the facts without my accusation, and without my accusation, I would have been an accessory. Hines would not have gained, but I would have lost.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Without a human witness, Multivac would have suspended sentence,\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not in the case of an anti-Multivac act. This wasn\rquote t a case of illegal parenthood or life--work without permission. I couldn\rquote t take the chance.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote So you let Simon be deprived of all work permits for two years,\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote He deserved it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote A\i  \i0 consoling thought, You may have lost the confidence of the Congress, but you have gained the confidence of Multivac,\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The confidence of Multivac is important in the world as it is, \ldblquote  said Bakst seriously. He was suddenly conscious of not being as tall as Noreen, \par
\tab She looked angry enough to strike him; her lips pressed whitely together, But then she had passed her eightieth birthday-no longer young-the habit of non-violence was too ingrained. ...Except for fools like Hines. \par
\tab\ldblquote Is that all you have to say, then?\rdblquote  she said. \par
\tab\ldblquote There could be a great deal to say, Have you forgotten? Have you all forgotten? Do you remember how it once was? Do you remember the Twentieth Century? We live long now; we live securely now; we live happily now.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We live worthlessly now.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you want to go back to what the world was like once?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Noreen shook her head violently. \ldblquote Demon tales to frighten us. We have learned our lesson. With the help of Multivac we have come through--but we don\rquote t need that help any longer. Further help will soften us to death. Without Multivac, \i we \i0 will run the robots, \i we \i0 will direct the farms and mines and factories.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How well?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Well enough. Better, with practice. We need the stimulation of it in any case or we will all die.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst said, \ldblquote We have our work, Noreen; whatever work we choose.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Whatever we choose, as long as it\rquote s unimportant, and even that can be taken away at will-as with Hines. And what\rquote s your work, Ron? Mathematical games? Drawing lines on paper? Choosing number combinations?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst\rquote s hand reached out to her, almost pleadingly. \ldblquote That can be important. It is not nonsense. Don\rquote t underestimate--\rdblquote  He paused, yearning to explain but not quite knowing how he could, safely. He said, \ldblquote I\rquote m working on some deep problems in combinatorial analysis based on gene patterns that can be used to--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote To amuse you and a few others. Yes, I\rquote ve heard you talk about your games. You will decide how to move from A to B in a minimum number of steps and that will teach you how to go from womb to grave in a minimum number of risks and we will all thank Multivac as we do so.\rdblquote  \par
\tab She stood up. \ldblquote Ron, you will be tried. I\rquote m sure of it. \i Our \i0 trial. And you will be dropped. Multivac will protect you against physical harm, but you know it will not force us to see you, speak to you, or have anything to do with you. You will find that without the stimulation of human interaction, you will not be able to think--or to play your games. Goodbye.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Noreen! Wait!\rdblquote  \par
\tab She turned at the door. \ldblquote Of course, you will have Multivac. You can talk to Multivac, Ron.\rdblquote  \par
\tab He watched her dwindle as she walked down the road through the parklands kept green, and ecologically healthy, by the unobtrusive labors of quiet, single-minded robots one scarcely ever saw. \par
\tab He thought: Yes, I will have to talk to Multivac. \par
\par
\tab Multivac had no particular home any longer. It was a global presence knit together by wire, optical fiber, and microwave. It had a brain divided into a hundred subsidiaries but acting as one. It had its outlets everywhere and no human being of the five million was far from one. \par
\tab There was time for all of them, since Multivac could speak to all individually at the same time and not lift its mind from the greater problems that concerned it. \par
\tab Bakst had no illusions as to its strength. What was its incredible intricacy but a mathematical game that Bakst had come to understand over a decade ago? He knew the manner in which the connecting links ran from continent to continent in a huge network whose analysis could form the basis of a fascinating game. How do you arrange the network so that the flow of information never jams? How do you arrange the switching points? Prove that no matter what the arrangement, there is always at least one point which, on disconnection\par
\tab Once Bakst had learned the game, he had dropped out of the Congress. What could they do but talk and of what use was that? Multivac indifferently permitted talk of any kind and in any depth precisely because it was unimportant. It was only acts that Multivac prevented, diverted, or punished. \par
\tab And it was Hines\rquote s act that was bringing on the crisis; and before Bakst was ready for it, too. \par
\tab Bakst had to hasten now, and he applied for an interview with Multivac without any degree of confidence in the outcome.\par
\tab Questions could be asked of Multivac at any time. There were nearly a million outlets of the type that had withstood Hines\rquote s sudden attack into which, or near which, one could speak. Multivac would answer. \par
\tab An \i interview \i0 was another matter. It required time; it required privacy; most of all it required Multivac\rquote s judgment that it was necessary. Although Multivac had capacities that not all the world\rquote s problems consumed, it had grown chary, somehow, of its time. Perhaps that was the result of its ever-continuing self-improvement. It was becoming constantly more aware of its own worth and less likely to bear trivialities with patience. \par
\tab Bakst had to depend on Multivac\rquote s good will. His leaving of the Congress, all his actions since, even the bearing of evidence against Mines, had been to gain that good will. Surely it was the key to success in this world. \par
\tab He would have to assume the good will. Having made the application, he at once traveled to the nearest substation by air. Nor did he merely send his image. He wanted to be there in person; somehow he felt his contact with Multivac would be closer in that way. \par
\par
\tab The room was almost as it might be if there were to be a human conference planned over closed multivision. For one flash-by moment, Bakst thought Multivac might assume an imaged human form and join him-the brain made flesh. \par
\tab It did not, of course. There was the soft, whispering chuckle of Multivac\rquote s unceasing operations; something always and forever present in Multivac\rquote s presence; and over it, now, Multivac\rquote s voice. \par
\tab It was not the usual voice of Multivac. It was a still, small voice, beautiful and insinuating, almost in his ear. \par
\tab\ldblquote Good day, Bakst. You are welcome. Your fellow human beings disapprove of you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Multivac always comes to the point, thought Bakst. He said, \ldblquote It does not matter, Multivac. What counts is that I accept your decisions as for the good of the human species. You were designed to do so in the primitive versions of yourself and--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And my self-designs have continued this basic approach. If \i you \i0 understand this, why \i do \i0 so many human beings fail to understand it? I have not yet completed the analysis of that phenomenon.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I have come to you with a problem,\rdblquote  said Bakst. Multivac said, \ldblquote What is it?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst said, \ldblquote I have spent a great deal of time on mathematical problems inspired by the study of genes and their combinations. I cannot find the necessary answers and home computerization is of no help.\rdblquote  \par
\tab There was an odd clicking and Bakst could not repress a slight shiver at the sudden thought that Multivac might be avoiding a laugh. It was a touch of the human beyond what even he was ready to accept. The voice was in his other ear and Multivac said: \par
\tab\ldblquote There are thousands of different genes in the human cell. Each gene has an average of perhaps fifty variations in existence and uncounted numbers that have never been in existence. If we were to attempt to calculate all possible combinations, the mere listing of them at my fastest speed, if steadily continued, would, in the longest possible lifetime of the Universe, achieve but an infinitesimal fraction of the total.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst said, \ldblquote A complete listing \i is \i0 not needed. That is the point of my game. Some combinations are more probable than others and by building probability upon probability, we can cut the task enormously. It is the manner of achieving this building of probability upon probability that I ask you to help me with.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It would still take a great deal of my time. How could I justify this to myself?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst hesitated. No use in trying a complicated selling job. With Multivac, a straight line was the shortest distance between two points. . \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote An appropriate gene combination might produce a human being more content to leave decisions to you, more willing to believe in your resolve to make men happy, more anxious to \i be \i0 happy. I cannot find the proper combination, but you might, and with guided genetic engineering--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I see what you mean. It is-good. I will devote some time to it.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\tab Bakst found it difficult to hitch into Noreen\rquote s private wave. length. Three times the connection broke away. He was not surprised. In the last two months, there had been an increasing tendency for technology to slip in minor ways-never for long, never seriously-and he greeted each occasion with a somber pleasure. \par
\tab This time it held. Noreen\rquote s face showed, holographically three-dimensional. It flickered a moment, but it held. \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m returning your call,\rdblquote  said Bakst, dully impersonal. \par
\tab\ldblquote For a while it seemed impossible to get you,\rdblquote  said Noreen. \ldblquote Where have you been?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not hiding. I\rquote m here, in Denver.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Why in Denver?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The world is my oyster, Noreen. I may go where I please.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Her face twitched a little. \ldblquote And perhaps find it empty everywhere. We are going to try you, Ron.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Now?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Now!\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And here?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And here!\rdblquote  \par
\tab Volumes of space flickered into different glitters on either side of Noreen, and further away, and behind. Bakst looked from side to side, counting. There were fourteen, six men, eight women. He knew every one of them. They had been good friends once, not so long ago. \par
\tab To either side and beyond the simulacra was the wild background of Colorado on a pleasant summer day that was heading toward its end. There had been a city here once named Denver. The site still bore the name though it had been cleared, as most of the city sites had been. ...He could count ten robots in sight, doing whatever it was robots did. \par
\tab They were maintaining the ecology, he supposed. He knew no details, but Multivac did, and it kepi fifty million robots allover the Earth in efficient order. \par
\tab Behind Bakst was one of the converging grids of Multivac, almost like a small fortress of self-defense. \par
\tab\ldblquote Why now?\rdblquote  he asked. \ldblquote And why here?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Automatically he turned to Eldred. She was the oldest of them and the one with authority-if a human being could be said to have authority. \par
\tab Eldred\rquote s dark-brown face looked a little weary. The years showed, all six score of them, but her voice was firm and incisive. \ldblquote Because we have the final fact now. Let Noreen tell you. She knows you best.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst\rquote s eyes shifted to Noreen. \ldblquote Of what crime am I accused?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Let us play no games, Ron. There are no crimes under Multivac except to strike for freedom and it is your human crime that you have committed no crime under Multivac. For that we will judge whether any human being alive wants your company any longer, wants to hear your voice, be aware of your presence, or respond to you in any way.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Why am I threatened with isolation then?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You have betrayed all human beings.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you deny that you seek to breed mankind into subservience to Multivac?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Ah!\rdblquote  Bakst folded his arms across his chest. \ldblquote You found out quickly, but then you had only to ask Multivac.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Noreen said, \ldblquote Do you deny that you asked for help in the genetic engineering of a strain of humanity designed to accept slavery under Multivac without question?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I suggested the breeding of a more contented humanity. Is this a betrayal?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Eldred intervened. She said, \ldblquote We don\rquote t want your sophistry, Ron. We know it by heart. Don\rquote t tell us once again that Multivac cannot be withstood, that there is no use in struggling, that we have gained security. What you call security, the rest of us call slavery.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst said, \ldblquote Do you proceed now to judgment, or am I allowed a defense?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You heard Eldred,\rdblquote  said Noreen. \ldblquote We know your defense.\rdblquote  . \par
\tab\ldblquote We all heard Eldred,\rdblquote  said Bakst, \ldblquote but no one has heard me. What she says is my defense is not my defense.\rdblquote  \par
\tab There was a silence as the images glanced right and left at each other. Eldred said, \ldblquote Speak!\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst said, \ldblquote I asked Multivac to help me solve a problem in the field of mathematical games. To gain his interest, I pointed out that it was modeled on gene combinations and that a solution might help in designing a gene combination that would leave man no worse off than he is now in any respect and yet breed into him a cheerful acceptance of Multivac\rquote s direction, and acquiescence in his decisions.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote So we have said,\rdblquote  said Eldred. \par
\tab\ldblquote It was only on those terms that Multivac would have accepted the task. Such a new breed is clearly desirable for mankind by Multivac\rquote s standards, and by Multivac\rquote s standards he must labor toward it: And the desirability of the end will lure him on to examine greater and greater complications of a problem whose endlessness is beyond what even he can handle. You all witness that.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Noreen said, \ldblquote Witness what?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Haven\rquote t you had trouble reaching me? In the last two months, hasn\rquote t each of you noticed small troubles in what has always gone smoothly? ...You are silent. May I accept that as an affirmative?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If so what then?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst said, \ldblquote Multivac has been placing all his spare circuits on the problem. He has been slowly pushing the running of the world toward rather a skimpy minimum of his efforts, since nothing, by his own sense of ethics, must stand in the way of human happiness and there can be no greater increase in that happiness than to accept Multivac.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Noreen said, \ldblquote What does all this mean? There is still enough in Multivac to run the world-and us-and if this is done at less than full efficiency, that would only add temporary discomfort to our slavery. Only temporary, because it won\rquote t last long. Sooner or later, Multivac will decide the problem is insoluble, or will solve it, and in either case, his distraction will end. In the latter case, slavery will become permanent and irrevocable.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But for now he is distracted,\rdblquote  said Bakst, \ldblquote and we can even talk like this-most dangerously-without his noticing. Yet I dare not risk doing so for long, so please understand me quickly. \par
\tab\ldblquote I have another mathematical game-the setting up of networks on the model of Multivac. I have been able to demonstrate that no matter how complicated and redundant the network is, there must be at least one place into which all the currents can funnel under particular circumstances. There will always be the fatal apoplectic stroke if that one place is interefered with, since it will induce overloading elsewhere which will break down and induce overloading elsewhere--and so on indefinitely till all breaks down.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And this is the point. Why else have I come to Denver? And Multivac knows it, too, and this point is guarded electronically and robotically to the extent that it cannot be penetrated.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But Multivac is distracted, and Multivac trusts me. I have labored hard to gain that trust, at the cost of losing all of you, since only with trust is there the possibility of betrayal. If any of you tried to approach this point, Multivac might rouse himself even out of his present distraction. If Multivac were not distracted, he would not allow even me to approach. But he \i is \i0 distracted, and it \i is \i0 I!\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst was moving toward the converging grid in a calm saunter, and the fourteen images, keyed to him, moved along as well. The soft susurrations of a busy Multivac center were all about them. \par
\tab Bakst said, \ldblquote Why attack an invulnerable opponent? Make him vulnerable first, and then--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bakst fought to stay calm, but it all depended on this now. Everything! With a sharp yank, he uncoupled a joint. (If he had only had still more time to make more certain.) \par
\tab He was not stopped--and as he held his breath, he became aware of the ceasing of noise, the ending of whisper, the closing down of Multivac. If, in a moment, that soft noise did not return, then he had had the right key point, and no recovery would be possible. If he were not quickly the focus of approaching robots\par
\tab He turned in the continuing silence. The robots in the distance were working still. None were approaching. \par
\tab Before him, the images of the fourteen men and women of the Congress were still there and each seemed to be stupefied at the sudden enormous thing that had happened. \par
\tab Bakst said, \ldblquote Multivac is shut down, burnt out. It can\rquote t be rebuilt.\rdblquote  He felt almost drunk at the sound of what he was saying. \ldblquote I have worked toward this since I left you. When Hines attacked, I feared there might be other such efforts, that Multivac would double his guard, that even I had to work quickly--I wasn\rquote t sure--\rdblquote  He was gasping, but forced himself steady, and said solemnly, \ldblquote I have given us our freedom.\rdblquote  \par
\tab And he paused, aware at last of the gathering weight of the silence. Fourteen images stared at him, without any of them offering a word in response. \par
\tab Bakst said sharply, \ldblquote You have talked of freedom. You \i have \i0 it!\rdblquote  \par
\tab Then, uncertainly, he said, \ldblquote Isn\rquote t that what you want?\rdblquote  \par
\par
\par
When I first finished the preceding story, or thought I had, I was left dissatisfied. I lay awake till about 2 A.M. trying to figure out what dissatisfied me, and then decided I had not made my point. I got up, quickly wrote down the last three paragraphs of the story as it finally appeared, ending with that horrified question, and then went peacefully to sleep. \par
\tab The next day, I rewrote the last page of the manuscript to include the new ending and when I sent it off to the \i Times, \i0 much as I wanted to make the sale, I indicated where I would be intransigent. \par
\tab\ldblquote Please note,\rdblquote  I wrote, \ldblquote that the ending on an unresolved question is not an accident. It is of the essence. Each reader is going to have to consider the meaning of the question and what answer he himself would give.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The \i Times \i0 asked for some trivial changes and clarifications but did not allow even a whisper of objection to emerge concerning my ending, I am glad to say. \par
\tab My own original title had been \ldblquote Mathematical Games,\rdblquote  by the way, and for a while I considered restoring it in the book version. However, THE LIFE AND TIMES OF MULTIVAC has a swing to it. Besides, a large number of people saw it on the single day during which it was available to the reading public. More people came up to me over the next few weeks to tell me they had read that story than had ever been the case for any other story I had ever written. I don\rquote t want them to think I changed the title in order to lure them into thinking they hadn\rquote t read the story before, so that they might buy this book, so THE LIFE AND TIMES OF MULTIVAC it stays. \par
\par
\b\par
\b0 Among those who saw my story in \i The New York Times Magazine \i0 was William Levinson, editor of \i Physician\rquote s World. \i0 In the same issue of the magazine section was an article entitled \ldblquote Triage.\rdblquote  Triage is a system of choosing whom to save and whom to allow to die when conditions do not allow of saving all. Triage has been used in medical emergencies when limited facilities have been applied to those with the best chance of making it. Now there is a feeling that triage might be applied on a worldwide scale, that some nations and regions cannot be saved and that no effort should be made to save them. \par
\tab It occurred to Levinson that the subject could be treated through the medium of science fiction and since my name was staring at him on the same contents page, he approached me. I was struck with the idea and agreed at once. I started it on January 19, 1975. Levinson liked THE WINNOWING when it was done and it was all set to appear in the June 1975 issue, when the magazine suddenly suspended publication the issue before. \par
\tab Sad and embarrassed, Levinson returned the story, but, of course, it wasn\rquote t his fault, so I wrote him a reassuring letter. After all, the story had been paid for and it wasn\rquote t likely I couldn\rquote t place it elsewhere. \par
\tab Ben Bova took it at once, in fact, and it appeared in the February 1976 \i Analog. \par
\par
\i0\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 The Winnowing \par
\pard\kerning0\f0\fs20\par
\tab\b0 Five years had passed since the steadily thickening wall of secrecy had been clamped down about the work of Dr. Aaron Rodman. \par
\tab\ldblquote For your own protection--\rdblquote  they had warned him. \par
\tab\ldblquote In the hands of the wrong people--\rdblquote  they had explained. \par
\tab In the right hands, of course (his own, for instance, Dr. Rodman thought rather despairingly), the discovery was clearly the greatest boon to human health since Pasteur\rquote s working out of the germ theory, and the greatest key to the understanding of the mechanism of life, ever. \par
\tab Yet after his talk at the New York Academy of Medicine soon after his fiftieth birthday, and on the first day of the Twenty-first Century (there had been a certain fitness to that), the silence had been imposed, and he could talk no more, except to certain officials. He certainly could not publish. \par
\tab The government supported him, however. He had all the money he needed, and the computers were his to do with as he wished. His work advanced rapidly and government men came to him to be instructed, to be made to understand. \par
\tab\ldblquote Dr. Rodman,\rdblquote  they would ask, \ldblquote how can a virus be spread from cell to cell within an organism and yet not be infectious from one organism to the next?\rdblquote  \par
\tab It wearied Rodman to have to say over and over that he did not have all the answers. It wearied him to have to use the term \ldblquote virus.\rdblquote  He said, \ldblquote It\rquote s not a virus because it isn\rquote t a nucleic acid molecule. It is something else altogether -a lipoprotein.\rdblquote  \par
\tab It was better when his questioners were not themselves medical men. He could then try to explain in generalities instead of forever bogging down on the fine points. He would say, \ldblquote Every living cell, and every small structure within the cell, is surrounded by a membrane. The workings of each cell depend on what molecules can pass through the membrane in either direction and at what rates. A slight change in the membrane will alter the nature of the flow enormously, and with that, the nature of the cell chemistry and the nature of its activity. \par
\tab\ldblquote All disease may rest on alterations in membrane activity. All mutations may be carried through by way of such alterations. Any technique that controls the membranes controls life. Hormones control the body by their effort on membranes and my lipoprotein is an artificial hormone rather than a virus. The LP incorporates itself into the membrane and in the process induces the manufacture of more molecules like itself-and that\rquote s the part I don\rquote t understand myself. \par
\tab\ldblquote But the fine structures of the membranes are not quite identical everywhere. They are, in fact, different in all living things-not quite the same -in any two organisms. An LP will affect no two individual organisms alike. What will open the cells of one organism to glucose and relieve the effects of diabetes, will close the cells of another organism to lysine and kill it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab That was what seemed to interest them most; that it was a poison. \par
\tab\ldblquote A selective poison,\rdblquote  Rodman would say. \ldblquote You couldn\rquote t tell, in advance, without the closest computer-aided studies of the membrane biochemistry of a particular individual, what a particular LP would do to him.\rdblquote  \par
\tab With time, the noose grew tighter about himself, inhibiting his freedom, yet leaving him comfortable--in a world in which freedom and comfort alike were vanishing everywhere, and the jaws of hell were opening before a despairing humanity. \par
\tab It was 2005 and Earth\rquote s population was six billion. But for the famines it would have been seven billion. A billion human beings had starved in the past generation, and more would yet starve. \par
\tab Peter Affare, chairman of the World Food Organization, came frequently to Rodman\rquote s laboratories for chess and conversation. It was he, he said, who had first grasped the significance of Rodman\rquote s talk at the Academy, and that had helped make him chairman. Rodman thought the significance was easy to grasp, but said nothing about that. \par
\tab Affare was ten years younger than Rodman, and the red was darkening out of his hair. He smiled frequently although the subject of the conversation rarely gave cause for smiling, since any chairman of an organization dealing with world food was bound to talk about world famine. \par
\tab Affare said, \ldblquote If the food supply were evenly distributed among all the world\rquote s inhabitants, all would starve to death.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If it were evenly distributed,\rdblquote  said Rodman, \ldblquote the example of justice in the world might lead at last to a sane world policy. As it is, there is world despair and fury over the selfish fortune of a few, and all behave irrationally in revenge.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You do not volunteer to give up your own oversupply of food,\rdblquote  said Affare. \par
\tab\ldblquote I am human and selfish, and my own action would mean little. I should not be asked to volunteer. I should be given no choice in the matter.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You are a romantic,\rdblquote  said Affare. \ldblquote Do you fail to see that the Earth is a lifeboat? If the food store is divided equally among all, then all will die. If some are cast out of the lifeboat, the remainder will survive. The question is not whether some will die, for some \i must \i0 die; the question is whether some will live.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Are you advocating triage--the sacrifice of some for the rest--officially?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We can\rquote t. The people in the lifeboat are armed. Several regions threaten openly to use nuclear weapons if more food is not forthcoming.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Rodman said sardonically, \ldblquote You mean the answer to \lquote you die that I may live\rquote  is \lquote If I die, you die.\rquote  ...An impasse.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not quite,\rdblquote  said Affare. \ldblquote There are places on Earth where the people cannot be saved. They have overweighted their land hopelessly with hordes of starving humanity. Suppose they are sent food, and suppose the food kills them so that the land requires no further shipments.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Rodman felt the first twinge of realization. \ldblquote Kills them how?\rdblquote  he asked. \par
\tab\ldblquote The average structural properties of the cellular membranes of a particular population can be worked out. An LP, particularly designed to take advantage of those properties, could be incorporated into the food supply, which would then be fatal,\rdblquote  said Affare. \par
\tab\ldblquote Unthinkable,\rdblquote  said Rodman, astounded. \par
\tab\ldblquote Think again. There would be no pain. The membranes would slowly close off and the affected person would fall asleep and not wake up-an infinitely better death than that of starvation which is otherwise inevitable--or nuclear annihilation. Nor would it be for everyone, for any population varies in its membranal properties. At worst, seventy per cent will die. The winnowing out will be done precisely where overpopulation and hopelessness are worst and enough will be left to preserve each nation, each ethnic group, each culture.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote To deliberately kill billions--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We would not be killing. We would merely supply the opportunity for people to die. Which particular individuals would die would depend on the particular biochemistry of those individuals. It would be the finger of God.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And when the world discovers what has been done?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote That will be after our time,\rdblquote  said Affare, \ldblquote and by then, a flourishing world with limited population will thank us for our heroic action in choosing the death of some to avoid the death of all.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Dr. Rodman felt himself flushing, and found he had difficulty speaking. \ldblquote The Earth,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote is a large and very complex lifeboat. We still do not know what can or can\rquote t be done with a proper distribution of resources and it is notorious that to this very day we have not really made an effort to distribute them. In many places on Earth, food is wasted daily, and it is that knowledge that drives hungry men mad.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I agree with you,\rdblquote  said Mare coolly, \ldblquote but we cannot have the world as we want it to be. We must deal with it as it is.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then deal with me as I am\rdblquote  You will want me to supply the necessary LP molecules-and I will not do so. I will not lift a finger in that direction.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then,\rdblquote  said Mare, \ldblquote you will be a greater mass murderer than you are accusing me of being. And I think you will change your mind when you have thought it through.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\tab He was visited nearly daily, by one official or another, all of them well fed. Rodman was becoming very sensitive to the way in which all those who discussed the need for killing the--hungry were themselves well fed. \par
\tab The National Secretary of Agriculture said to him, insinuatingly, on one of these occasions, \ldblquote Would you not favor killing a herd of cattle infected with hoof -and-mouth disease or with anthrax in order to avoid the spread of infection to healthy herds?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Human beings are not cattle,\rdblquote  said Rodman, \ldblquote and famine is not contagious.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But it is,\rdblquote  said the Secretary. \ldblquote That is precisely the point. If we don\rquote t winnow the overcrowded masses of humanity, their famine will spread to as yet unaffected areas. You must not refuse to help us.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How can you make me?\i  \i0 Torture?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We wouldn\rquote t harm a hair on your body. Your skill in this matter is too precious to us. Food stamps can be withdrawn, however.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Starvation would harm me,\rdblquote  surely.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Not you. But if we are prepared to kill several billion people for the sake of the human race, then surely we are ready for the much less difficult task of withdrawing food stamps from your daughter, her husband, and her baby.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Rodman was silent, and the Secretary said, \ldblquote We\rquote ll give you time to think. We don\rquote t want to take action against your family, but we will if we have to. Take a week to think about it. Next Thursday the entire committee will be on hand. You will then be committed to our project and there must be no further delay.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\tab Security was redoubled and Rodman was openly and completely a prisoner. A week later, all fifteen members of the World Food Council, together with the National Secretary of Agriculture and a few members of the National Legislature, arrived at his laboratory. They sat about the long table in the conference room of the lavish research building that had  been built out of public funds. \par
\tab For hours they talked and planned, incorporating those answers which Rodman gave to specific questions. No one asked Rodman if he would cooperate; there seemed no thought that he could do anything else. \par
\tab Finally Rodman said, \ldblquote Your project cannot, in any case, work. Shortly after a shipment of grain arrives in some particular region of the world, people will die by the hundreds of millions. Do you suppose those who survive will not make the connection and that you will not risk the desperate retaliation of nuclear bombs?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Affare, who sat directly opposite Rodman, across the short axis of the table, said, \ldblquote We are aware of that possibility. Do you think we have spent years determining a course of action and have not considered the possible reaction of those regions chosen for winnowing?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you expect them to be thankful?\rdblquote  asked Rodman bitterly. \par
\tab\ldblquote They will not know they are being singled out. Not all shipments of grain will be LP-infected. No one place will be concentrated on. We will see to it that locally grown grain supplies are infected here and there. In addition, not everyone will die and only a few will die at once. Some who eat much of the grain will not die at all, and some who eat only a small amount will die quickly--depending on their membranes. It will seem like a plague, like the Black Death returned.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Rodman said, \ldblquote Have you thought of the effect of the Black Death returned? Have you thought of the panic?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It will do them good,\rdblquote  growled the Secretary from one end of the table. \ldblquote It might teach them a lesson.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We will announce the discovery of an antitoxin,\rdblquote  said Affare, shrugging. \ldblquote There will be wholesale inoculations in regions we know will not be affected. Dr. Rodman, the world is desperately ill, and must have a desperate remedy. Mankind is on the brink of a horrible death, so please do not quarrel with the only course that can save it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s the point. \i Is \i0 it the only course or are you just taking an easy way out that will not ask any sacrifices of you-merely of billions of others?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Rodman broke off as a food trolley was brought in. He muttered, \ldblquote I have arranged for some refreshments. May we have a few moments of truce while we eat?\rdblquote  \par
\tab He reached for a sandwich and then, after a while, said between sips of coffee, \ldblquote We eat well, at least, as we discuss the greatest mass murder in history.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Affare looked critically at his own half-eaten sandwich. \ldblquote This is not eating \i well. \i0 Egg salad on white bread of indifferent freshness is not eating well, and I would change whatever coffee shop supplied this, if I were you.\rdblquote  He sighed. \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, in a world of famine, one should not waste food,\rdblquote  and he finished the sandwich. \par
\tab Rodman watched the others and then reached for the last remaining sandwich on the tray. \ldblquote I thought,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote that perhaps some of you might suffer a loss of appetite in view of the subject matter of discussion, but I see none of you did. Each one of you has eaten.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote As did you,\rdblquote  said Mare impatiently. \ldblquote You are still eating.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, I am,\rdblquote  said Rodman, chewing slowly. \ldblquote And I apologize for the lack of freshness in the bread. I made the sandwiches myself last night and they are fifteen hours old.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You made them yourself?\rdblquote  said Mare. \par
\tab\ldblquote I had to, since I could in no other way be certain of introducing the proper LP.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What are you talking about?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Gentlemen, you tell me it is necessary to kill some to save others. Perhaps you are right. You have convinced me. But in order to know exactly what it is we are doing we should perhaps experience it ourselves. I have engaged in a little triage on my own, and the sandwiches we have all just eaten are an experiment in that direction.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Some of the officials were rising to their feet. \ldblquote We\rquote re poisoned?\rdblquote  gasped the Secretary. \par
\tab Rodman said, \ldblquote Not very effectively. Unfortunately, I don\rquote t know your biochemistries thoroughly, so I can\rquote t guarantee the seventy per cent death rate you would like.\rdblquote  \par
\tab They were staring at him in frozen horror, and Dr. Rodman\rquote s eyelids drooped. \ldblquote Still, it\rquote s likely that two or three of you will die within the next week or so, and you need only wait to see who it will be. There\rquote s no cure or antidote, but don\rquote t worry. It\rquote s a quite painless death, and it will be the finger of God, as one of you told me. It\rquote s a good lesson, as another of you said. For those of you who survive, there may be new views on triage.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Affare said, \ldblquote This is a bluff. You\rquote ve eaten the sandwiches yourself.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Rodman said, \ldblquote I know. I matched the LP to my own biochemistry, so I will go fast. \ldblquote  His eyes closed. \ldblquote You\rquote ll have to carryon without me--those of you who survive.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\par
\b\par
\b0 The next story has rather a sad history, though I myself emerged unscathed. Here\rquote s how it goes. \par
\tab In January 1975, Naomi Gordon, a very charming woman from Philadelphia, visited me and explained what I thought was a delightful idea for an anthology. It was to be entitled \i The Bicentennial Man; \i0 It was to contain ten stories by top authors, with each one built about that phrase; and it was to be published in connection with the Bicentennial. The well known science fiction enthusiast Forrest J. Ackerman was to do the editing. Naomi also had rather grandiose notions of preparing a very limited, very expensive edition. \par
\tab I pointed out it would be difficult to write science fiction if the stories were to be centered on the Bicentennial, but Naomi said that the stories could be anything at all provided they could be seen to have arisen out of the phrase \ldblquote The Bicentennial Man.\rdblquote  \par
\tab I was intrigued and agreed to do it. I was handed half the advance at once. The deadline was April 1, 1975, and by March 14 I was finished. I was a little rueful about the story at first, for the agreement had called for a 7,500-word story and I had been unable to stop it before it had reached 15,000 --the longest story I had written below the level of a novel in seventeen years. I write an apologetic covering letter, assuring Naomi that there would be no extra charge and she wrote back to say the extra wordage would be fine. Pretty soon, the remaining half of the advance arrived. . \par
\tab But then everything went wrong. Naomi was beset by family and medical problems; some writers who it had been hoped would participate, couldn\rquote t; others who promised stories didn\rquote t deliver them; those who did deliver them did not turn out entirely satisfactory products. \par
\tab Of course, I didn\rquote t know anything about this. It never even occurred to me that anything might go wrong. Actually, my only large interest is in \i writing. \i0 Selling is a minor interest, and what happens afterward is of almost no interest. \par
\tab There was, however, Judy-Lynn del Rey and her enormous awareness of everything that goes on in science fiction. She knew that I had written a story for this anthology. \par
\tab\ldblquote How is it,\rdblquote  she asked dangerously, \ldblquote that you wrote a story for that anthology, yet when I ask you for one you\rquote re always too busy?\rdblquote * \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, \ldblquote  I said apologetically, for Judy-Lynn is a frightening creature when she is moved, \ldblquote the idea of the anthology interested me.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How about my suggestions about a robot that has to choose between buying its own liberty and improving its -body? I thought you said that was interesting.\rdblquote  \par
\tab At that point, I must have turned approximately as white as talcum powder. A long time before, she \i had \i0 mentioned such things and I had forgotten. I said, \ldblquote Oh, my goodness, I included something of the sort in the story.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\i\ldblquote Again?\rdblquote  \i0 she shrieked. \i\ldblquote Again \i0 you\rquote re using my ideas for other people? Let me see that story. Let me see it!\rdblquote  \par
\tab So I brought her a carbon copy the next day and the day after that she called me. She said, \ldblquote I tried hard not to like the story, but I didn\rquote t manage. I want it. Get the story back.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I can\rquote t do that,\rdblquote  I said. \ldblquote I sold it to Naomi and it\rquote s hers. I\rquote ll write you a different story.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote 1\rquote 11 bet you anything you like,\rdblquote  said Judy-Lynn, \ldblquote that that anthology isn\rquote t going to go through. Why don\rquote t you call and ask?\rquote . \par
\tab I called Naomi and, of course, it wasn\rquote t going through. She agreed to send me back the manuscript and grant me permission to sell the story elsewhere, and I sent back the advance she had given me. (After all, she had lost considerable money on the venture, and I didn\rquote t want any of that loss to represent a profit to me.) \par
\tab The story was then transferred to Judy-Lynn, who used it in her anthology of originals entitled \i Stellar Science Fiction \i0 #2, which appeared in February 1976. And I like the story so much myself that I not only am including it here, but am using its title for the book as a whole. \par
\tab (Incidentally, after this book was put together, Judy-Lynn suggested I change my manuscript to make it jibe with the version in \i Stellar. \i0 Apparently, she had introduced numerous minor changes that improved it, she said. Well, I am not Harlan Ellison, so I don\rquote t mind, but I think that in my own collection, I\rquote ll let the story stand as I wrote it. Judy-Lynn will be annoyed, but she can\rquote t do worse than kill me.) \par
\tab *This was during the Passover Seder, over which Lester del Rey presides every year with enormous effectiveness, since he is the best cook in science fiction. \par
\tab\par
\tab\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 The Bicentennial Man\par
\pard\kerning0\b0\f2\fs20\par
\i\f0 The Three Laws of Robotics \par
\pard\fi-288\li1008 1. A robot may not injure a human being, or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm. \par
2. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the First Law.\par
3. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law. \par
\pard\i0\f2\par
\pard\qc\f0 1.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Andrew Martin said, \ldblquote Thank you,\rdblquote  and took the seat offered him. He didn\rquote t look driven to the last resort, but he had been.\par
\tab He didn\rquote t, actually, look anything, for there was a smooth blankness, to his face, except for the sadness one imagined one saw in his eyes. His hair was smooth, light brown, rather fine; and he had no facial hair. He looked freshly and cleanly shaved. His clothes were distinctly old-fashioned, but neat, and predominantly a velvety red-purple in color.\par
\tab Facing him from behind the desk was the surgeon. The nameplate on the desk included a fully identifying series of letters and numbers which Andrew didn\rquote t bother with. To call him Doctor would be quite enough.\par
\tab\ldblquote When can the operation be carried through, Doctor?\rdblquote  he asked.\par
\tab Softly, with that certain inalienable note of respect that a robot always used to a human being, the surgeon said, \ldblquote I am not certain, sir, that I understand how or upon whom such an operation could be performed.\rdblquote\par
\tab There might have been a look of respectful intransigence on the surgeon\rquote s face, if a robot of his sort, in lightly bronzed stainless steel, could have such an expression-- or any expression.\par
\tab Andrew Martin studied the robot\rquote s right hand, his cutting hand, as it lay motionless on the desk. The fingers were long and were shaped into artistically metallic, looping curves so graceful and appropriate that one could imagine a scalpel fitting them and becoming, temporarily, one piece with them. There would be no hesitation in his work, no stumbling, no quivering, no mistakes. That confidence came with specialization, of course, a specialization so fiercely desired by humanity that few robots were, any longer, independently brained. A surgeon, of course, would have to be. But this one, though brained, was so limited in his capacity that he did not recognize Andrew, had probably never heard of him.\par
\tab\ldblquote Have you ever thought you would like to be a man?\rdblquote  Andrew asked.\par
\tab The surgeon hesitated a moment, as though the question fitted nowhere in his allotted positronic pathways. \ldblquote But I am a robot, sir.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Would it be better to be a man?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote If would be better, sir, to be a better surgeon. I could not be so if I were a man, but only if I were a more advanced robot. I would be pleased to be a more advanced robot.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It does not offend you that I can order you about? That I can make you stand up, sit down, move right or left, by merely telling you to do so?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It is my pleasure to please you, sir. If your orders were to interfere with my functioning with respect to you or to any other human being, I would not obey you. The First Law, concerning my duty to human safety, would take precedence over the Second Law relating to obedience. Otherwise, obedience is my pleasure. Now, upon whom am I to perform this operation?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Upon me,\rdblquote  Andrew said.\par
\tab\ldblquote But that is impossible. It is patently a damaging operation.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote That does not matter,\rdblquote  said Andrew, calmly. \ldblquote I must not inflict damage,\rdblquote  said the surgeon. \ldblquote On a human being, you must not,\rdblquote  said Andrew, \ldblquote but I, too, am a robot.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 2.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Andrew had appeared much more a robot when he had first been-- manufactured. He had then been as much a robot in appearance as any that had ever existed, smoothly designed and functional.\par
\tab He had done well in the home to which he had been brought in those days when robots in households, or on the planet altogether, had been a rarity. There had been four in the home: Sir and Ma\rquote am and Miss and Little Miss. He knew their names, of course, but he never used them. Sir was Gerald Martin.\par
\tab His own serial number was NDR-- He eventually forgot the numbers. It had been a long time, of course; but if he had wanted to remember, he could not have forgotten. He had not wanted to remember.\par
\tab Little Miss had been the first to call him Andrew, because she could not use the letters, and all the rest followed her in this.\par
\tab Little Miss-- She had lived for ninety years and was long since dead. He had tried to call her Ma\rquote am once, but she would not allow it. Little Miss she had been to her last day.\par
\tab Andrew had been intended to perform the duties of a valet, a butler, even a lady\rquote s maid. Those were the experimental days for him and, indeed, for all robots anywhere save in the industrial and exploratory factories and stations off Earth.\par
\tab The Martins enjoyed him, and half the time he was prevented from doing his work because Miss and Little Miss wanted to play with him. It was Miss who first understood how this might be arranged. \ldblquote We order you to play with us and you must follow orders.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I am sorry, Miss, but a prior order from Sir must surely take precedence.\rdblquote\par
\tab But she said, \ldblquote Daddy just said he hoped you would take care of the cleaning. That\rquote s not much of an order. I \i order\i0  you.\rdblquote\par
\tab Sir did not mind. Sir was fond of Miss and of Little Miss, even more than Ma\rquote am was; and Andrew was fond of them, too. At least, the effect they had upon his actions were those which in a human being would have been called the result of fondness. Andrew thought of it as fondness for he did not know any other word for it.\par
\tab It was for Little Miss that Andrew had carved a pendant out of wood. She had ordered him to. Miss, it seemed, had received an ivorite pendant with scrollwork for her birthday and Little Miss was unhappy over it. She had only a piece of wood, which she gave Andrew together with a small kitchen knife.\par
\tab He had done it quickly and Little Miss had said, \ldblquote That\rquote s \i nice\i0 , Andrew. I\rquote ll show it to Daddy.\rdblquote\par
\tab Sir would not believe it. \ldblquote Where did you really get this, Mandy?\rdblquote  Mandy was what he called Little Miss. When Little Miss assured him she was really telling the truth, he turned to Andrew. \ldblquote Did you do this, Andrew?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, Sir.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The design, too?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, Sir.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote From what did you copy the design?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It is a geometric representation, Sir, that fits the grain of the wood.\rdblquote\par
\tab The next day, Sir brought him another piece of wood-- a larger one-- and an electric vibro-knife. \ldblquote Make something out of this, Andrew. Anything you want to,\rdblquote  he said.\par
\tab Andrew did so as Sir watched, then looked at the product a long time. After that, Andrew no longer waited on tables. He was ordered to read books on furniture design instead, and he learned to make cabinets and desks.\par
\tab\ldblquote These are amazing productions, Andrew,\rdblquote  Sir soon told him.\par
\tab\ldblquote I enjoy doing them, Sir,\rdblquote  Andrew admitted.\par
\tab\ldblquote Enjoy?\rdblquote\par
\f2\tab\f0\ldblquote It makes the circuits of my brain somehow flow more easily. I have heard you use the word `enjoy\rquote  and the way you use it fits the way I feel. I enjoy doing them, Sir.\rdblquote  \par
\f2\par
\pard\qc\f0 3.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Gerald Martin took Andrew to the regional offices of the United States Robots and Mechanical Men Corporation. As a member of the Regional Legislature he had no trouble at all in gaining an interview with the chief robopsychologist. In fact, it was only as a member of the Regional Legislature that he qualified as a robot owner in the first place-- in those early days when robots were rare.\par
\tab Andrew did not understand any of this at the time. But in later years, with greater learning, he could re-view that early scene and understand it in its proper light.\par
\tab The robopsychologist, Merton Mansky, listened with a growing frown and more than once managed to stop his fingers at the point beyond which they would have irrevocably drummed on the table. He had drawn features and a lined forehead, but he might actually have been younger than he looked.\par
\tab\ldblquote Robotics is not an exact art, Mr. Martin,\rdblquote  Mansky explained. \ldblquote I cannot explain it to you in detail, but the mathematics governing the plotting of the positronic pathways is far too complicated to permit of any but approximate solutions. Naturally, since we build everything around the Three Laws, those are incontrovertible. We will, of course, replace your robot--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Not at all,\rdblquote  said Sir. \ldblquote There is no question of failure on his part. He performs his assigned duties perfectly. The point is he also carves wood in exquisite fashion and never the same twice. He produces works of art.\rdblquote\par
\tab Mansky looked confused. \ldblquote Strange. Of course, we\rquote re attempting generalized pathways these days. Really creative, you think?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote See for yourself.\rdblquote  Sir handed over a little sphere of wood on which there was a playground scene in which the boys and girls were almost too small to make out, yet they were in perfect proportion and they blended so naturally with the grain that it, too, seemed to have been carved.\par
\tab Mansky was incredulous. \ldblquote\i He\i0  did that?\rdblquote  He handed it back with a shake of his head. \ldblquote The luck of the draw. Something in the pathways.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Can you do it again?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Probably not. Nothing like this has ever been reported.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Good! I don\rquote t in the least mind Andrew\rquote s being the only one.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I suspect that the company would like to have your robot back for study,\rdblquote  Mansky said.\par
\tab\ldblquote Not a chance!\rdblquote  Sir said with sudden grimness. \ldblquote Forget it.\rdblquote  He turned to Andrew, \ldblquote Let\rquote s go home, now.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 4.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Miss was dating boys and wasn\rquote t about the house much. It was Little Miss, not as little as she once was, who filled Andrew\rquote s horizon now. She never forgot that the very first piece of wood carving he had done had been for her. She kept it on a silver chain about her neck.\par
\tab It was she who first objected to Sir\rquote s habit of giving away Andrew\rquote s work. \ldblquote Come on, Dad, if anyone wants one of them, let him pay for it. It\rquote s worth it.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It isn\rquote t like you to be greedy, Mandy.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Not for us, Dad. For the artist.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew had never heard the word before, and when he had a moment to himself he looked it up in the dictionary.\par
\tab Then there was another trip, this time to Sir\rquote s lawyer.\par
\tab\ldblquote What do you think of this, John?\rdblquote  Sir asked.\par
\tab The lawyer was John Finegold. He had white hair and a pudgy belly, and the rims of his contact lenses were tinted a bright green. He looked at the small plaque Sir had given him. \ldblquote This is beautiful. But I\rquote ve already heard the news. Isn\rquote t thus a carving made by your robot? The one you\rquote ve brought with you.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, Andrew does them. Don\rquote t you, Andrew?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, Sir,\rdblquote  said Andrew.\par
\tab\ldblquote How much would you pay for that, John?\rdblquote  Sir asked.\par
\tab\ldblquote I can\rquote t say. I\rquote m not a collector of such things.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Would you believe I have been offered two hundred and fifty dollars for that small thing. Andrew has made chairs that have sold for five hundred dollars. There\rquote s two hundred thousand dollars in the bank from Andrew\rquote s products.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Good heavens, he\rquote s making you rich, Gerald.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Half rich,\rdblquote  said Sir. \ldblquote Half of it is in an account in the name of Andrew Martin.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The robot?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s right, and I want to know if it\rquote s legal.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Legal . . . ?\rdblquote  Feingold\rquote s chair creaked as he leaned back in it. \ldblquote There are no precedents, Gerald. How did your robot sign the necessary papers?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote He can sign his name. Now, is there anything further that ought to be done?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Um.\rdblquote  Feingold\rquote s eyes seemed to turn inward for a moment. Then he said, \ldblquote Well, we can set up a trust to handle all finances in his name and that will place a layer of insulation between him and the hostile world. Beyond that, my advice is you do nothing. No one has e stopped you so far. If anyone objects, let \i him\i0  bring suit\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And will you take the case if the suit is brought?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote For a retainer, certainly.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote How much?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Something like that,\rdblquote  Feingold said, and pointed to the wooden plaque.\par
\tab\ldblquote Fair enough,\rdblquote  said Sir.\par
\tab Feingold chuckled as he turned to the robot. \ldblquote Andrew, are you pleased that you have money?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, sir.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What do you plan to do with it?\rdblquote  Pay for things, sir, which otherwise Sir \ldblquote would have to pay for. It would save him expense, sir.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 5.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Such occasions\rquote  arose. Repairs were expensive, and revisions were even more so. With the years, new models of robots were produced and Sir saw to it that Andrew had the advantage of every new device, until he was a model of metallic excellence. It was all done at Andrew\rquote s expense. Andrew insisted on that.\par
\tab Only his positronic pathways were untouched. Sir insisted on that.\par
\tab\ldblquote The new models aren\rquote t as good as you are, Andrew,\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote The new robots are worthless. The company has learned to make the pathways more precise, more closely on the nose, more deeply on the track. The new robots don\rquote t shift. They do what they\rquote re designed for and never stray. I like you better.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Thank you, Sir.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And it\rquote s your doing, Andrew, don\rquote t you forget that. I am certain Mansky put an end to generalized pathways as soon as he had a good look at you. He didn\rquote t like the unpredictability. Do you know how many times he asked for you back so he could place you under study? Nine times! I never let him have you, though; and now that he\rquote s retired, we may have some peace.\rdblquote\par
\tab So Sir\rquote s hair thinned and grayed and his face grew pouchy, while Andrew looked even better than he had when he first joined the family. Ma\rquote am had joined an art colony somewhere in Europe, and Miss was a poet in New York. They wrote sometimes, but not often. Little Miss was married and lived not far away. She said she did not want to leave Andrew. When her child, Little Sir, was born, she let Andrew hold the bottle and feed him.\par
\tab With the birth of a grandson, Andrew felt that Sir finally had someone to replace those who had gone. Therefore, it would not be so unfair now to come to him with the request.\par
\tab\ldblquote Sir, it is kind of you to have allowed me to spend my money as I wished\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It was your money, Andrew.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Only by your voluntary act, Sir. I do not believe the law would have stopped you from keeping it all.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The law won\rquote t persuade me to do wrong, Andrew.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Despite all expenses, and despite taxes, too, Sir, I have nearly six hundred thousand dollars.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I know that, Andrew.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I want to give it to you, Sir.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I won\rquote t take it, Andrew\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote In exchange for something you can give me, Sir\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Oh? What is that, Andrew?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote My freedom, Sir.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Your--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I wish to buy my freedom, Sir.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 6.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 It wasn\rquote t that easy. Sir had flushed, had said, \ldblquote For God\rquote s sake!\rdblquote  Then he had turned on his heel and stalked away.\par
\tab It was Little Miss who finally brought him round, defiantly and harshly-- and in front of Andrew. For thirty years no one had ever hesitated to talk in front of Andrew, whether or not the matter involved Andrew. He was only a robot.\par
\tab\ldblquote Dad, why are you taking this as a personal affront? He\rquote ll still be here. He\rquote ll still be loyal. He can\rquote t help that; it\rquote s built in. All he wants is a form of words. Ha wants to be called free. Is that so terrible? Hasn\rquote t be earned this chance? Heavens, he and I have been talking about it for years!\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Talking about it for years, have you?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, and over and over again he postponed it for fear he would hurt you. I \i made\i0  him put the matter up to you.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote He doesn\rquote t know what freedom is. He\rquote s a robot.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Dad, you don\rquote t know him. He\rquote s read everything in the library. I don\rquote t know what he feels inside, but I don\rquote t know what \i you\i0  feel inside either. When you talk to him you\rquote ll find he reacts to the various abstractions as you and I do, and what else counts? If some one else\rquote s reactions are like your own, what more can you ask for?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The law won\rquote t take that attitude,\rdblquote  Sir said, angrily. \ldblquote See here, you!\rdblquote  He turned to Andrew with a deliberate grate in his voice. \ldblquote I can\rquote t free you except by doing it legally. If this gets into the courts, you not only won\rquote t get your freedom but the law will take official cognizance of your money. They\rquote ll tell you that a robot has no right to earn money. Is this rigmarole worth losing your money?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Freedom is without price, Sir,\rdblquote  said Andrew. \ldblquote Even the chance of freedom is worth the money.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 7.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 It seemed the court might also take the attitude that freedom was without price, and might decide that for no price, however great, could a robot buy its freedom.\par
\tab The simple statement of the regional attorney who represented those who had brought a class action to oppose the freedom was this: \ldblquote The word `freedom\rquote  has no meaning when applied to a robot. Only a human being can be free.\rdblquote  He said it several times, when it seemed appropriate; slowly, with his hand coming down rhythmically on the desk before him to mark the words.\par
\tab Little Miss asked permission to speak on behalf of Andrew.\par
\tab She was recognized by her full name, something Andrew had never heard pronounced before: \ldblquote Amanda Laura Martin Charney may approach the bench.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Thank you, Your Honor. I am not a lawyer and I don\rquote t know the proper way of phrasing things, but I hope you will listen to my meaning and ignore the words.\par
\tab\ldblquote Let\rquote s understand what it means to be free in Andrew\rquote s case. In some ways, he \i is\i0  free. I think it\rquote s at least twenty years since anyone in the Martin family gave him an order to do something that we felt he might not do of his own accord. But we can, if we wish, give him an order to do anything, couching it as harshly as we wish, because he is a machine that belongs to us. Why should we be in a position to do so, when he has served us so long, so faithfully, and has earned so much money for us? He owes us nothing more. The debit is entirely on the other side.\par
\tab\ldblquote Even if we were legally forbidden to place Andrew in involuntary servitude, he would still serve us voluntarily. Making him free would be a trick of words only, but it would mean much to him. It would give him everything and cost us nothing.\rdblquote\par
\tab For a moment the judge seemed to be suppressing a smile. \ldblquote I see your point, Mrs. Chamey. The fact is that there is no binding law in this respect and no precedent. There is, however, the unspoken assumption that only a man may enjoy freedom. I can make new law here, subject to reversal in a higher court; but I cannot lightly run counter to that assumption. Let me address the robot. Andrew!\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, Your Honor.\rdblquote\par
\tab It was the first time Andrew bad spoken in court, and the judge seemed astonished for a moment at the human timbre of his voice.\par
\tab\ldblquote Why do you want to be free, Andrew? In what way will this matter to you?\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew said, \ldblquote Would you wish to be a slave, Your Honor?\rdblquote\par
\f2\tab\f0\ldblquote But you are not a slave. You are a perfectly good robot-- a genius of a robot, I am given to understand, capable of an artistic expression that can be matched nowhere. What more could you do if you were free?\rdblquote\par
\f2\tab\f0\ldblquote Perhaps no more than I do now, Your Honor, but with greater joy. It has been said in this courtroom that only a human being can be free. It seems to me that only someone who wishes for freedom can be free. I wish for freedom.\rdblquote\par
\tab And it was that statement that cued the judge. The crucial sentence in his decision was \ldblquote There is no right to deny freedom to any object with a mind advanced enough to grasp the concept and desire the state.\rdblquote  It was eventually upheld by the World Court. \par
\par
\pard\qc 8.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Sir remained displeased, and his harsh voice made Andrew feel as if he were being short-circuited. \ldblquote I don\rquote t want your damned money, Andrew. I\rquote ll take it only because you won\rquote t feel free otherwise. From now on, you can select your own jobs and do them as you please. I will give you no orders, except this one: Do as you please. But I am still responsible for you. That\rquote s part of the court order. I hope you understand that.\rdblquote\par
\tab Little Miss interrupted. \ldblquote Don\rquote t be irascible, Dad. The responsibility is no great chore. You know you won\rquote t have to do a thing. The Three Laws still hold.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Then how is he free?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Are not human beings bound by their laws, Sir?\rdblquote  Andrew replied.\par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m not going to argue.\rdblquote  Sir left the room, and Andrew saw him only infrequently after that.\par
\tab Little Miss came to see him frequently in the small house that had been built and made over for him. It had no kitchen, of course, nor bathroom facilities. It had just two rooms; one was a library and one was a combination storeroom and workroom. Andrew accepted many commissions and worked harder as a free robot than he ever had before, till the cost of the house was paid for and the structure was signed over to him.\par
\tab One day Little Sir-- no, \ldblquote George!\rdblquote -- came. Little Sir had insisted on that after the court decision. \ldblquote A free robot doesn\rquote t call anyone Little Sir,\rdblquote  George had said. \ldblquote I call you Andrew. You must call me George.\rdblquote\par
\tab His preference was phrased as an order, so Andrew called him George-- but Little Miss remained Little Miss.\par
\tab One day when George came alone, it was to say that Sir was dying. Little Miss was at the bedside, but Sir wanted Andrew as well.\par
\tab Sir\rquote s voice was still quite strong, though he seemed unable to move much. He struggled to raise his hand.\par
\tab\ldblquote Andrew,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote Andrew-- Don\rquote t help me, George. I\rquote m only dying; I\rquote m not crippled. Andrew, I\rquote m glad you\rquote re free. I just wanted to tell you that.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew did not know what to say. He had never been at the side of someone dying before, but he knew it was the human way of ceasing to function. It was an involuntary and irreversible dismantling, and Andrew did not know what to say that might be appropriate. He could only remain standing, absolutely silent, absolutely motionless.\par
\tab When it was over, Little Miss said to him, \ldblquote He may not have seemed friendly to you toward the end, Andrew, but he was old, you know; and it hurt him that you should want to be free.\rdblquote\par
\tab Then Andrew found the words. \ldblquote I would never have been free without him, Little Miss.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 9.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Only after Sir\rquote s death did Andrew begin to wear clothes. He began with an old pair of trousers at first, a pair that George had given him.\par
\tab George was married now, and a lawyer. He had joined Feingold\rquote s firm. Old Feingold was long since dead, but his daughter had carried on. Eventually the firm\rquote s name became Feingold and Martin. It remained so even when the daughter retired and no Feingold took her place. At the time Andrew first put on clothes, the Martin name had just been added to the firm.\par
\tab George had tried not to smile the first time he saw Andrew attempting to put on trousers, but to Andrew\rquote s eyes the smile was clearly there. George showed Andrew how to manipulate the static charge to allow the trousers to open, wrap about his lower body, and move shut. George demonstrated on his own trousers, but Andrew was quite aware it would take him a while to duplicate that one flowing motion.\par
\tab\ldblquote But why do you want trousers, Andrew? Your body is so beautifully functional it\rquote s a shame to cover it especially when you needn\rquote t worry about either temperature control or modesty. And the material doesn\rquote t cling properly-- not on metal.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew held his ground. \ldblquote Are not human bodies beautifully functional, George? Yet you cover yourselves.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote For warmth, for cleanliness, for protection, for decorativeness. None of that applies to you.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I feel bare without clothes. I feel different, George,\rdblquote  Andrew responded.\par
\tab\ldblquote Different! Andrew, there are millions of robots on Earth now. In this region, according to the last census, there are almost as many robots as there are men.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I know, George. There are robots doing every conceivable type of work.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And none of them wear clothes.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But none of them are free, George.\rdblquote\par
\tab Little by little, Andrew added to his wardrobe. He was inhibited by George\rquote s smile and by the stares of the people who commissioned work.\par
\tab He might be free, but there was built into Andrew a carefully detailed program concerning his behavior to people, and it was only by the tiniest steps that he dared advance; open disapproval would set him back months. Not everyone accepted Andrew as free. He was incapable of resenting that, and yet there was a difficulty about his thinking process when he thought of it. Most of all, he tended to avoid putting on clothes-- or too many of them-- when he thought Little Miss might come to visit him. She was older now and was often away in some warmer climate, but when she returned the first thing she did was visit him.\par
\tab On one of her visits, George said, ruefully, \ldblquote She\rquote s got me, Andrew. I\rquote ll be running for the legislature next year. `Like grandfather,\rquote  she says, `like grandson.\rquote\ldblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Like grandfather . . .\rdblquote  Andrew stopped, uncertain.\par
\tab\ldblquote I mean that I, George, the grandson, will be like Sir, the grandfather, who was in the legislature once.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It would be pleasant, George, if Sir were still--\rdblquote  He paused, for he did not want to say, \ldblquote in working order.\rdblquote  That seemed inappropriate.\par
\tab\ldblquote Alive;\rdblquote  George said. \ldblquote Yes, I think of the old monster now and then, too.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew often thought about this conversation. He had noticed his own incapacity in speech when talking with George. Somehow the language had changed since Andrew had come into being with a built-in vocabulary. Then, too, George used a colloquial speech, as Sir and Little Miss had not. Why should he have called Sir a monster when surely that word was not a appropriate. Andrew could not even turn to his own books for guidance. They were old, and most dealt with woodworking, with art, with furniture design. There were none on language, none on the ways of human beings.\par
\tab Finally, it seemed to him that he must seek the proper books; and as a free robot, he felt he must not ask George. He would go to town and use the library. It was a triumphant decision and he felt his electro potential grow distinctly higher until he had to throw in an impedance coil.\par
\tab He put on a full costume, including even a shoulder chain of wood. He would have preferred the glitter plastic, but George had said that wood was much more appropriate, and that polished cedar was considerably more valuable as well.\par
\tab He had placed a hundred feet between himself and the house before gathering resistance brought him to a halt. He shifted the impedance coil out of circuit, and when that did not seem to help enough he returned to his home and on a piece of notepaper wrote neatly, \ldblquote I have gone to the library,\rdblquote  and placed it in clear view on his worktable. \par
\par
\pard\qc 10.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Andrew never quite got to the library.\par
\tab He had studied the map. He knew the route, but not the appearance of it. The actual landmarks did not resemble the symbols on the map and he would hesitate. Eventually, he thought he must have somehow gone wrong, for everything looked strange.\par
\tab He passed an occasional field-robot, but by the time he decided he should ask his way none were in sight. A vehicle passed and did not stop.\par
\tab Andrew stood irresolute, which meant calmly motionless, for coming across the field toward him were two human beings.\par
\tab He turned to face them, and they altered their course to meet him. A moment before, they had been talking loudly. He had heard their voices. But now they were silent. They had the look that Andrew associated with human uncertainty; and they were young, but not very young. Twenty, perhaps? Andrew could never judge human age.\par
\tab\ldblquote Would you describe to me the route to the town library, sirs?\rdblquote\par
\tab One of them, the taller of the two, whose tall hat lengthened him still farther, almost grotesquely, said, not to Andrew, but to the other, \ldblquote It\rquote s a robot.\rdblquote\par
\tab The other had a bulbous nose and heavy eyelids. He said, not to Andrew but to the first, \ldblquote It\rquote s wearing clothes.\rdblquote\par
\tab The tall one snapped his fingers. \ldblquote It\rquote s the free robot. They have a robot at the old Martin place who isn\rquote t owned by anybody. Why else would it be wearing clothes?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Ask it,\rdblquote  said the one with the nose.\par
\tab\ldblquote Are you the Martin robot?\rdblquote  asked the tall one.\par
\tab\ldblquote I am Andrew Martin, sir,\rdblquote  Andrew said.\par
\tab\ldblquote Good. Take off your clothes. Robots don\rquote t wear clothes.\rdblquote  He said to the other, \ldblquote That\rquote s disgusting. Look at him!\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew hesitated. He hadn\rquote t heard an order in that tone of voice in so long that his Second Law circuits had momentarily jammed.\par
\tab The tall one repeated, \ldblquote Take off your clothes. I order you.\rdblquote\par
\tab Slowly, Andrew began to remove them.\par
\tab\ldblquote Just drop them,\rdblquote  said the tall one.\par
\tab The nose said, \ldblquote If it doesn\rquote t belong to anyone, it could be ours as much as someone else\rquote s.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Anyway,\rdblquote  said the tall one, \ldblquote who\rquote s to object to anything we do. We\rquote re not damaging property.\rdblquote  tie turned to Andrew. \ldblquote Stand on your head.\rdblquote  \ldblquote The head is not meant-\rdblquote  Andrew began.\par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s an order. If you don\rquote t know how, try anyway.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew hesitated again, then bent to put his head on the ground. He tried to lift his legs but fell, heavily.\par
\tab The tall one said, \ldblquote Just lie there.\rdblquote  He said to the other, \ldblquote We can take him apart. Ever take a robot apart?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Will he let us?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote How can he stop us?\rdblquote\par
\tab There was no way Andrew could stop them, if they ordered him in a forceful enough manner not to resist The Second Law of obedience took precedence over the Third Law of self-preservation. In any case, he could not defend himself without possibly hurting them, and that would mean breaking the First Law. At that thought, he felt every motile unit contract slightly and he quivered as he lay there.\par
\tab The tall one walked over and pushed at him with his foot. \ldblquote He\rquote s heavy. I think we\rquote ll need tools to do the job.\rdblquote\par
\tab The nose said, \ldblquote We could order him to take himself, apart. It would be fun to watch him try.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  said the tall one, thoughtfully, \ldblquote but let\rquote s get him off the road. If someone comes along--\rdblquote\par
\tab It was too late. Someone had, indeed, come along and it was George. From where he lay, Andrew had seen him topping a small rise in the middle distance. He would have liked to signal him in some way, but the last order had been \ldblquote Just lie there!\rdblquote\par
\tab George was running now, and he arrived on the scene somewhat winded. The two young men stepped back a little and then waited thoughtfully.\par
\tab\ldblquote Andrew, has something gone wrong?\rdblquote  George asked, anxiously.\par
\tab Andrew replied, \ldblquote I am well, George.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Then stand up. What happened to your clothes?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote That your robot, Mac?\rdblquote  the tall young man asked.\par
\tab George turned sharply. \ldblquote He\rquote s no one\rquote s robot. What\rquote s been going on here.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We politely asked him to take his clothes off. What\rquote s that to you, if you don\rquote t own him.\rdblquote\par
\tab George turned to Andrew. \ldblquote What were they doing, Andrew?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It was their intention in some way to dismember me. They were about to move me to a quiet spot and order me to dismember myself.\rdblquote\par
\tab George looked at the two young men, and his chin trembled.\par
\tab The young men retreated no farther. They were smiling.\par
\tab The tall one said, lightly, \ldblquote What are you going to do, pudgy? Attack us?\rdblquote\par
\tab George said, \ldblquote No. I don\rquote t have to. This robot has been with my family for over seventy-five years. He knows us and he values us more than he values anyone else. I am going to tell him that you two are threatening my life and that you plan to kill me. I will ask him to defend me. In choosing between me and you two, he will choose me. Do you know what will happen to you when he attacks you?\rdblquote\par
\tab The two were backing away slightly, looking uneasy.\par
\tab George said, sharply, \ldblquote Andrew, I am in danger and about to come to harm from these young men. Move toward them!\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew did so, and the young men did not wait. They ran.\par
\tab\ldblquote All right, Andrew, relax,\rdblquote  George said. He looked unstrung. He was far past the age where he could face the possibility of a dustup with one young man, let alone two.\par
\tab\ldblquote I couldn\rquote t have hurt them, George: I could see they were not attacking you.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I didn\rquote t order you to attack them. I only told you to move toward them. Their own fears did the rest.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote How can they fear robots?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s a disease of mankind, one which has not yet been cured. But never mind that. What the devil are you doing here, Andrew? Good thing I found your note. I was just on the point of turning back and hiring a helicopter when I found you. How did you get it into your head to go to the library? I would have brought you any books you needed\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I am a--\rdblquote  Andrew began.\par
\tab\ldblquote Free robot. Yes, yes. All right, what did you want in the library?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I want to know more about human beings, about the world, about everything. And about robots, George. I want to write a history about robots.\rdblquote\par
\tab George put his arm on the other\rquote s shoulder. \ldblquote Well, let\rquote s walk home. But pick up your clothes first. Andrew, there are a million books on robotics and all of them include histories of the science. The world is growing saturated not only with robots but with information about robots.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew shook his head, a human gesture he had lately begun to adopt. \ldblquote Not a history of robotics, George. A history of \i robots\i0 , by a robot. I want to explain how robots feel about what has happened since the first ones were allowed to work and live on Earth.\rdblquote\par
\tab George\rquote s eyebrows lifted, but he said nothing in direct response. \par
\par
\pard\qc 11.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Little Miss was just past her eighty-third birthday, but there was nothing about her that was lacking in either energy or determination. She gestured with her cane oftener than she propped herself up with it.\par
\tab She listened to the story in a fury of indignation. \ldblquote George, that\rquote s horrible. Who were those young ruffians?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t know. What difference does it make? In the end they did not do any damage.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote They might have. You\rquote re a lawyer, George; and if you\rquote re well off, it\rquote s entirely due to the talents of Andrew. It was the money \i he\i0  earned that is the foundation of everything we have. He provides the continuity for this family, and I will \i not\i0  have him treated as a wind-up toy.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What would you have me do, Mother?\rdblquote  George asked.\par
\tab\ldblquote I said you\rquote re a lawyer. Don\rquote t you listen? You set up a test case somehow, and you force the regional courts to declare for robot rights and get the legislature to pass the necessary bills. Carry the whole thing to the World Court, if you have to. I\rquote ll be watching, George, and I\rquote ll tolerate no shirking.\rdblquote\par
\tab She was serious, so what began as a way of soothing the fearsome old lady became an involved matter with enough legal entanglement to make it interesting. As senior partner of Feingold and Martin, George plotted strategy. But he left the actual work to his junior partners, with much of it a matter for his son, Paul, who was also a member of the firm and who reported dutifully nearly every day to his grandmother. She, in turn, discussed the case every day with Andrew.\par
\tab Andrew was deeply involved. His work on his book on robots was delayed again, as he pored over the legal arguments and even, at times, made very diffident suggestions. \par
\tab\ldblquote George told me that day I was attacked that human beings have always been afraid of robots,\rdblquote  he said one day. \ldblquote As long as they are, the courts and the legislatures are not likely to work hard on behalf of robots. Should not something be done about public opinion?\rdblquote\par
\tab So while Paul stayed in court, George took to the public platform. It gave him the advantage of being informal, and he even went so far sometimes as to wear the new, loose style of clothing which he called drapery.\par
\tab Paul chided him, \ldblquote Just don\rquote t trip over it on stage, Dad.\rdblquote\par
\tab George replied, despondently, \ldblquote I\rquote ll try not to.\rdblquote\par
\tab He addressed the annual convention of holo-news editors on one occasion and said, in part: \ldblquote If, by virtue of the Second Law, we can demand of any robot unlimited obedience in all respects not involving harm to a human being, then any human being, \i any\i0  human being, has a fearsome power over any robot, \i any\i0  robot. In particular, since Second Law supersedes Third Law; \i any\i0  human being can use the law of obedience to overcome the law of self-protection. He can order any robot to damage itself or even to destroy itself for any reason, or for no reason.\par
\tab\ldblquote Is this just? Would we treat an animal so? Even an inanimate object which had given us good service has a claim on our consideration. And a robot is not insensitive; it is not an animal. It can think well enough so that it can talk to us, reason with us, joke with us. Can we treat them as friends, can we work together with them, and not give them some of the fruits of that friendship, some of the benefits of co-working?\par
\tab\ldblquote If a man has the right to give a robot any order that does not involve harm to a human being, he should have the decency never to give a robot any order that involves harm to a robot, unless human safety absolutely requires it. With great power goes great responsibility, and if the robots have Three Laws to protect men, is it too much to ask that men have a law or two to protect robots?\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew was right. It was the battle over public opinion that held the key to courts and legislature. In the end, a law was passed that set up conditions under which robot-harming orders were forbidden. It was endlessly qualified and the punishments for violating the law were totally inadequate, but the principle was established. The final passage by the World Legislature came through on the day of Little Miss\rquote  death.\par
\tab That was no coincidence. Little Miss held on to life desperately during the last debate and let go only when word of victory arrived. Her last smile was for Andrew. Her last words were, \ldblquote You have been good to us, Andrew.\rdblquote  She died with her hand holding his, while her son and his wife and children remained at a respectful distance from both. \par
\par
\pard\qc 12.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Andrew waited patiently when the receptionist-robot disappeared into the inner office. The receptionist might have used the holographic chatterbox, but un-questionably it was perturbed by having to deal with another robot rather than with a human being.\par
\tab Andrew passed the time revolving the matter his mind: Could \ldblquote unroboted\rdblquote  be used as an analog of \ldblquote unmanned,\rdblquote  or had unmanned become a metaphoric term sufficiently divorced from its original literal meaning to be applied to robots--or to women for that matter? Such problems frequently arose as he worked on his book on robots. The trick of thinking out sentences to express all complexities had undoubtedly increased his vocabulary.\par
\tab Occasionally, someone came into the room to stare at him and he did not try to avoid the glance. He looked at each calmly, and each in turn looked away.\par
\tab Paul Martin finally emerged. He looked surprised, or he would have if Andrew could have made out his expression with certainty. Paul had taken to wearing the heavy makeup that fashion was dictating for bath sexes. Though it made sharper and firmer the somewhat bland lines of Paul\rquote s face, Andrew disapproved. He found that disapproving of human beings, as long as he did not express it verbally, did not make him very uneasy. He could even write the disapproval. He was sure it had not always been so.\par
\tab\ldblquote Come in, Andrew. I\rquote m sorry I made you wait, but there was something I \i had\i0  to finish. Come in, you had said you wanted to talk to me, but I didn\rquote t know you meant here in town.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote If you are busy, Paul, I am prepared to continue to wait.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul glanced at the interplay of shifting shadows on the dial on the wall that served as timepieces and said, \ldblquote I can make some time. Did you come alone?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I hired an automatobile.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Any trouble?\rdblquote  Paul asked, with more than a trace of anxiety.\par
\tab\ldblquote I wasn\rquote t expecting any. My rights are protected.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul looked all the more anxious for that. \ldblquote Andrew, I\rquote ve explained that the law is unenforceable, at least under most conditions. And if you insist on wearing clothes, you\rquote ll run into trouble eventually; just like that first time.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And only tine, Paul. I\rquote m sorry you are displeased\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Well, look at it this way: you are virtually a living legend, Andrew, and you are too valuable in many different ways for you to have any right to take chances with yourself. By the way, how\rquote s the book coming?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I am approaching the end, Paul. The publisher is quite pleased.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Good!\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t know that he\rquote s necessarily pleased with the book as a book. I think he expects to sell many copies because it\rquote s written by a robot and that\rquote s what pleases him.\par
\tab\ldblquote Only human, I\rquote m afraid.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I am not displeased. Let it sell for whatever reason, since it will mean money and I can use some.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Grandmother left you--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Little Miss was generous, and I\rquote m sure I can count on the family to help me out further. But it is the royalties from the book on which I am counting to help me through the next step.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What next step is that?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I wish to see the head of U.S. Robots and Mechanical Men Corporation. I have tried to make an appointment; but so far I have not been able to reach him. The Corporation did not cooperate with me in the writing of the book, so I am not surprised, you understand.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul was clearly amused. \ldblquote Cooperation is the last thing you can expect. They didn\rquote t cooperate with us in our great fight for robot rights. Quite the reverse, and you can see why. Give a robot rights and people may not want to buy them.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Nevertheless,\rdblquote  said Andrew, \ldblquote if you call them, you may be able to obtain an interview for me.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m no more popular with them than you are, Andrew.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But perhaps you can hint that by seeing me they may head off a campaign by Feingold and Martin to strengthen the rights of robots further.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Wouldn\rquote t that be a lie, Andrew?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, Paul, and I can\rquote t tell one. That is why you must call.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Ah, you can\rquote t lie, but you can urge me to tell a lie, is that it? You\rquote re getting more human all the time, Andrew.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 13.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 The meeting was not easy to arrange, even with Paul\rquote s supposedly weighted name.\par
\tab But it finally came about. When it did, Harley Smythe-Robertson, who, on his mother\rquote s side, was descended from the original founder of the corporation and who had adopted the hyphenation to indicate it, looked remarkably unhappy. He was approaching retirement age and his entire tenure as president had been devoted to the matter of robot rights. His gray hair was plastered thinly over the top of his scalp; his face was not made up, and he eyed Andrew with brief hostility from time to time.\par
\tab Andrew began the conversation. \ldblquote Sir, nearly a century ago, I was told by a Merton Mansky of this corporation that the mathematics governing the plotting of the positronic pathways was far too complicated to permit of any but approximate solutions and that, therefore, my own capacities were not fully predictable.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote That was a century ago.\rdblquote  Smythe-Robertson hesitated, then said icily, \ldblquote\i Sir\i0 . It is true no longer. Our robots are made with precision now and are trained precisely to their jobs.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  said Paul, who had come along, as he said, to make sure that the corporation played fair, \ldblquote with the result that my receptionist must be guided at every point once events depart from the conventional, however slightly.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You would be much more displeased if it were to improvise,\rdblquote  Smythe-Robertson said.\par
\tab\ldblquote Then you no longer manufacture robots like myself which are flexible and adaptable.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No longer.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The research I have done in connection with my book,\rdblquote  said Andrew, \ldblquote indicates that I am the oldest robot presently in active operation.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The oldest presently,\rdblquote  said Smythe-Robertson, \ldblquote and the oldest ever. The oldest that will ever be. No robot is useful after the twenty-fifth year. They are called in and replaced with newer models.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No robot \i as presently manufactured\i0  is useful after the twentieth year,\rdblquote  said Paul, with a note of sarcasm creeping into his voice. \ldblquote Andrew is quite exceptional in this respect.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew, adhering to the path he had marked out for himself, continued, \ldblquote As the oldest robot in the world and the most flexible, am I not unusual enough to merit special treatment from the company?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Not at all,\rdblquote  Smythe-Robertson said, freezing up. \ldblquote Your unusualness is an embarrassment to the company. If you were on lease, instead of having been an outright sale through some mischance, you would long since have been replaced.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But that is exactly the point,\rdblquote  said Andrew. \ldblquote I am a free robot and I own myself. Therefore I come to you and ask you to replace me. You cannot do this without the owner\rquote s consent. Nowadays, that consent is extorted as a condition of the lease, but in my time this did not happen.\rdblquote\par
\tab Smythe-Robertson was looking both startled and puzzled, and for a moment there was silence. Andrew found himself staring at the hologram on the wall. It was a death mask of Susan Calvin, patron saint of all roboticists. She had been dead for nearly two centuries now, but as a result of writing his book Andrew knew, her so well he could half persuade himself that he had met her in life.\par
\tab Finally Smythe-Robertson asked, \ldblquote How can I replace you for you? If I replace you, as robot, how can I donate the new robot to you as owner since in the very act of replacement you cease to exist.\rdblquote  He smiled grimly.\par
\tab\ldblquote Not at all difficult,\rdblquote  Paul interposed. \ldblquote The seat of Andrew\rquote s personality is his positronic brain and it is the one part that cannot be replaced without creating a new robot. The positronic brain, therefore, is Andrew the owner. Every other part of the robotic body can be replaced without affecting the robot\rquote s personality, and those other parts are the brain\rquote s possessions. Andrew, I should say, wants to supply his brain with a new robotic body.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s right,\rdblquote  said Andrew, calmly. He turned to Smythe-Robertson. \ldblquote You have manufactured androids, haven\rquote t you? Robots that have the outward appearance of humans, complete to the texture of the skin?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, we have. They worked perfectly well, with their synthetic fibrous skins and tendons. There was virtually no metal anywhere except for the brain, yet they were nearly as tough as metal robots. They were tougher, weight for weight.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul looked interested. \ldblquote I didn\rquote t know that. How many are on the market?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote None,\rdblquote  said Smythe-Robertson. \ldblquote They were much more expensive than metal models and a market survey showed they would not be accepted. They looked too human.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew was impressed. \ldblquote But the corporation retains its expertise, I assume. Since it does, I wish to request that I be replaced by an organic robot, an android.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul looked surprised. \ldblquote Good Lord!\rdblquote  he said.\par
\tab Smythe-Robertson stiffened. \ldblquote Quite impossible!\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Why is it impossible?\rdblquote  Andrew asked. \ldblquote I will pay any reasonable fee, of course.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We do not manufacture androids.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You do not \i choose\i0  to manufacture androids,\rdblquote  Paul interjected quickly. \ldblquote That is not the same as being unable to manufacture them.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Nevertheless,\rdblquote  Smythe-Robertson responded, \ldblquote the manufacture of androids is against public policy.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote There is no law against it,\rdblquote  said Paul.\par
\tab\ldblquote Nevertheless, we do not manufacture them-- and we will not.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul cleared his throat. \ldblquote Mr. Smythe-Robertson,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote Andrew is a free robot who comes under the purview of the law guaranteeing robot rights. You are aware of this, I take it?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Only too well.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote This robot, as a free robot, chooses to wear clothes. This results in his being frequently humiliated by thoughtless human beings despite the law against the humiliation of robots. It is difficult to prosecute vague offenses that don\rquote t meet with the general disapproval of those who must decide on guilt and innocence.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote U.S. Robots understood that from the start. Your father\rquote s firm unfortunately did not.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote My father is dead now, but what I see is that we have here a clear offense with a clear target.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What are you talking about?\rdblquote  said Smythe-Robertson.\par
\tab\ldblquote My client, Andrew Martin-- he has just become my client-- is a free robot who is entitled to ask U.S. Robots and Mechanical Men Corporation for the rights of replacement, which the corporation supplies to anyone who owns a robot for more than twenty-five years. In fact, the corporation insists on such replacement.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul was smiling and thoroughly at ease. \ldblquote The positronic brain of my client,\rdblquote  he went on, \ldblquote is the owner of the body of my client which is certainly more than twenty-five years old. The positronic brain demands the replacement of the body and offers to pay any reasonable fee for an android body as that replacement. If you refuse the request, my client undergoes humiliation and we will sue.\par
\tab\ldblquote While public opinion would not ordinarily support the claim of a robot in such a case, may I remind you that U.S. Robots is not popular with the public generally. Even those who most use and profit from robots are suspicious of the corporation. This may be a hangover from the days when robots were widely feared. It may be resentment against the power and wealth of U.S. Robots, which has a worldwide monopoly. Whatever the cause may be, the resentment eats. I think you will find that you would prefer not to be faced with a lawsuit, particularly since my client is wealthy and will live for many more centuries and will have no reason to refrain from fighting the battle forever.\rdblquote\par
\tab Smythe-Robertson had slowly reddened. \ldblquote You are trying to force--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I force you to do nothing,\rdblquote  said Paul. \ldblquote If you wish to refuse to accede to my client\rquote s reasonable request, you may by all means do so and we will leave without another word. But we will sue, as is certainly our right, and you will find that you will eventually lose.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Well.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I see that you are going to accede,\rdblquote  said Paul. \ldblquote You may hesitate but you will come to it in the end. Let me assure you, then, of one further point: If, in the process of transferring my client\rquote s positronic brain from his present body to an organic one, there is any damage, however slight, then I will never rest until I\rquote ve nailed the corporation to the ground. I will, if necessary, take every possible step to mobilize public opinion against the corporation if one brain path of my client\rquote s platinum-iridium essence is scrambled.\rdblquote  He turned to Andrew and asked, \ldblquote Do you agree to all this, Andrew?\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew hesitated a full minute. It amounted to the approval of lying, of blackmail, of the badgering and humiliation of a human being. But not physical harm, he told himself, not physical harm.\par
\tab He managed at last to come out with a rather faint \ldblquote Yes.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 14.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 He felt as though he were being constructed again. For days, then for weeks, finally for months, Andrew found himself not himself somehow, and the simplest actions kept giving rise to hesitation.\par
\tab Paul was frantic. \ldblquote They\rquote ve damaged you, Andrew. We\rquote ll have to institute suit!\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew spoke very slowly. \ldblquote You-- mustn\rquote t. You\rquote ll never be able to prove-- something-- like m-m-m-m-- \rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Malice?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Malice. Besides, I grow-- stronger, better. It\rquote s the tr-- tr-- tr-- \rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Tremble?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Trauma. After all, there\rquote s never been such an op-op-op-- before.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew could feel his brain from the inside. No one else could. He knew he was well, and during the months that it took him to learn full coordination and full positronic interplay he spent hours before the mirror.\par
\tab Not quite human! The face was stiff-- too stiff and the motions were too deliberate. They lacked the careless, free flow of the human being, but perhaps that might come with time. At least now he could wear clothes without the ridiculous anomaly of a metal face going along with it.\par
\tab Eventually, he said, \ldblquote I will be going back to work.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul laughed. \ldblquote That means you are well. What will you be doing? Another book?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No,\rdblquote  said Andrew, seriously. \ldblquote I live too long for any one career to seize me by the throat and never let me go. There was a time when I was primarily an artist, and I can still turn to that. And there was a time when I was a historian, and I can still turn to that. But now I wish to be a robobiologist.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote A robopsychologist, you mean.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No. That would imply the study of positronic brains, and at the moment I lack the desire to do that. A robobiologist, it seems to me, would be concerned with the working of the body attached to that brain.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Wouldn\rquote t that be a roboticist?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote A roboticist works with a metal body. I would be studying an organic humanoid body, of which I have the only one, as far as I know.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You narrow your field,\rdblquote  said Paul, thoughtfully. \ldblquote As an artist, all conception is yours; as a historian you deal chiefly with robots; as a robobiologist, you will deal with yourself.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew nodded. \ldblquote It would seem so.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew had to start from the very beginning, for he knew nothing of ordinary biology and almost nothing of science. He became a familiar sight in the libraries, where he sat at the electronic indices for hours at a time, looking perfectly normal in clothes. Those few who knew he was a robot in no way interfered with him.\par
\tab He built a laboratory in a room which he added to his house; and his library grew, too.\par
\tab Years passed, and Paul came to him one day and said, \ldblquote It\rquote s a pity you\rquote re no longer working on the history of robots. I understand U.S. Robots is adopting a radically new policy.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul had aged, and his deteriorating eyes had been replaced with photoptic cells. In that respect, he had drawn closer to Andrew.\par
\tab\ldblquote What have they done?\rdblquote  Andrew asked.\par
\tab\ldblquote They are manufacturing central computers, gigantic positronic brains, really, which communicate with anywhere from a dozen to a thousand robots by microwave. The robots themselves have no brains at all. They are the limbs of the gigantic brain, and the two are physically separate.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Is that more efficient?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote U.S. Robots claims it is. Smythe-Robertson established the new direction before he died, however, and it\rquote s my notion that it\rquote s a backlash at you. U.S. Robots is determined that they will make no robots that will give them the type of trouble you have, and for that reason they separate brain and body. The brain will have no body to wish changed; the body will have no brain to wish anything.\par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s amazing, Andrew,\rdblquote  Paul went on, \ldblquote the influence you have had on the history of. robots. It was your artistry that encouraged U.S. Robots to make robots more precise and specialized; it was your freedom that resulted in the establishment of the principle of robotic rights; it was your insistence on an android body that made U.S. Robots switch to brain-body separation\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew grew thoughtful. \ldblquote I suppose in the end the corporation will produce one vast brain controlling several billion robotic bodies. All the eggs will be in one basket. Dangerous. Not proper at all.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I think you\rquote re right,\rdblquote  said Paul, \ldblquote but I don\rquote t suspect it will come to pass for a century at least and I won\rquote t live to see it. In fact, I may not live to see next year.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Paul!\rdblquote  cried Andrew, in concern.\par
\tab Paul shrugged. \ldblquote Men are mortal, Andrew. We\rquote re not like you. It doesn\rquote t matter too much, but it does make it important to assure you on one point. I\rquote m the last of the human Martins. The money I control personally will be left to the trust in your name, and as far as anyone can foresee the future, you will be economically secure.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Unnecessary,\rdblquote  Andrew said, with difficulty. In all this time, he could not get used to the deaths of the Martins.\par
\tab\ldblquote Let\rquote s not argue. That\rquote s the way it\rquote s going to be. Now, what are you working on?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I am designing a system for allowing androids-- myself-- to gain energy from the combustion of hydrocarbons, rather than from atomic cells.\rdblquote\par
\tab Paul raised his eyebrows. \ldblquote So that they will breathe and eat?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote How long have you been pushing in that direction?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote For a long time now, but I think I have finally designed an adequate combustion chamber for catalyzed controlled breakdown.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But why, Andrew? The atomic cell is surely infinitely better.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In some ways, perhaps. But the atomic cell is inhuman.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 15.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 It took time, but Andrew had time. In the first place, he did not wish to do anything till Paul had died in peace. With the death of the great-grandson of Sir, Andrew felt more nearly exposed to a hostile world and for that reason was all the more determined along the path he had chosen.\par
\tab Yet he was not really alone. If a man had died, the firm of Feingold and Martin lived, for a corporation does not die any more than a robot does.\par
\tab The firm had its directions and it followed them soullessly. By way of the trust and through the law firm, Andrew continued to be wealthy. In return for their own large annual retainer, Feingold and Martin involved themselves in the legal aspects of the new combustion chamber. But when the time came for Andrew to visit U.S. Robots and Mechanical Men Corporation, he did it alone. Once he had gone with Sir and once with Paul. This time, the third time, he was alone and manlike.\par
\tab U.S. Robots had changed. The actual production plant had been shifted to a large space station, as had grown to be the case with more and more industries. With them had gone many robots. The Earth itself was becoming park like, with its one-billion-person population stabilized and perhaps not more than thirty percent of its at-least-equally-large robot population independently brained.\par
\tab The Director of Research was Alvin Magdescu, dark of complexion and hair, with a little pointed beard and wearing nothing above the waist but the breast band that fashion dictated. Andrew himself was well covered in the older fashion of several decades back.\par
\tab Magdescu offered his hand to his visitor. \ldblquote I know you, of course, and I\rquote m rather pleased to see you. You\rquote re our most notorious product and it\rquote s a pity old Smythe-Robertson was so set against you. We could have done a great deal with you.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You still can,\rdblquote  said Andrew.\par
\tab\ldblquote No, I don\rquote t think so. We\rquote re past the time. We\rquote ve had robots on Earth for over a century, but that\rquote s changing. It will be back to space with them, and those that stay here won\rquote t be brained.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But there remains myself, and I stay on Earth.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote True, but there doesn\rquote t seem to be much of the robot about you. What new request have you?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote To be still less a robot. Since I am so far organic, I wish an organic source of energy. I have here the plans--\rdblquote\par
\tab Magdescu did not hasten through them. He might have intended to at first, but he stiffened and grew intent. At one point, he said, \ldblquote This is remarkably ingenious. Who thought of all this?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I did,\rdblquote  Andrew replied.\par
\tab Magdescu looked up at him sharply, then said, \ldblquote It would amount to a major overhaul of your body, and an experimental one, since such a thing has never been attempted before. I advise against it. Remain as you are.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew\rquote s face had limited means of expression, but impatience showed plainly in his voice. \ldblquote Dr. Magdescu, you miss the entire point: You have no choice but to accede to my request. If such devices can be built into my body, they can be built into human bodies as well. The tendency to lengthen human life by prosthetic devices has already been remarked on. There are no devices better than the ones I have designed or am designing. As it happens, I control the patents by way of the firm of Feingold and Martin. We are quite capable of going into business for ourselves and of developing the kind of prosthetic devices that may end by producing human beings with many of the properties of robots. Your own business will then suffer.\par
\tab\ldblquote If, however, you operate on me now and agree to do so under similar circumstances in the future, you will receive permission to make use of the patents and control the technology of both robots and of the prosthetization of human beings. The initial leasing will not be granted, of course, until after the first operation is completed successfully, and after enough time has passed to demonstrate that it is indeed successful.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew felt scarcely any First Law inhibition to the stern conditions he was setting a human being. He was learning to reason that what seemed like cruelty might, in the long run, be kindness.\par
\tab Magdescu was stunned. \ldblquote I\rquote m not the one to decide something like this. That\rquote s a corporate decision that would take time.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I can wait a reasonable time,\rdblquote  said Andrew, \ldblquote but only a reasonable time.\rdblquote  And he thought with satisfaction that Paul himself could not have done it better. \par
\par
\pard\qc 16.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 It took only a reasonable time, and the operation was a success.\par
\tab\ldblquote I was very much against the operation, Andrew,\rdblquote  Magdescu said, \ldblquote but not for the reasons you might think. I was not in the least against the experiment, if it had been on someone else. I hated risking \i your\i0  positronic brain. Now that you have the positronic pathways interacting with simulated nerve pathways, it might have been difficult to rescue the brain intact if the body had gone bad.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I had every faith in the skill of the staff at U.S. Robots,\rdblquote  said Andrew. \ldblquote And I can eat now.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Well, you can sip olive oil. It will mean occasional cleanings of the combustion chamber, as we have explained to you. Rather an uncomfortable touch, I should think.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Perhaps, if I did not expect to go further. Self cleaning is not impossible. In fact, I am working on a device that will deal with solid food that may be expected to contain incombustible fractions-- indigestible matter, so to speak, that will have to be discarded.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You would then have to develop an anus.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Or the equivalent.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What else, Andrew--?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Everything else.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Genitalia, too?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Insofar as they will fit my plans. My body is a canvas on which I intend to draw--\rdblquote\par
\tab Magdescu waited for the sentence to he completed, and when it seemed that it would not be, he completed it himself. \ldblquote A man?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We shall see,\rdblquote  Andrew said.\par
\f2\tab\f0\ldblquote That\rquote s a puny ambition, Andrew. You\rquote re better than a man. You\rquote ve gone downhill from the moment you opted to become organic.\rdblquote\par
\f2\tab\f0\ldblquote My brain has not suffered.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No, it hasn\rquote t. I\rquote ll grant you that. But, Andrew, the whole new breakthrough in prosthetic devices made possible by your patents is being marketed under your name. You\rquote re recognized as the inventor and you\rquote re being honored for it-- as you should be. Why play further games with your body?\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew did not answer.\par
\tab The honors came. He accepted membership in several learned societies, including one that was devoted to the new science he had established-- the one he had called robobiology but which had come to be termed prosthetology. On the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of his construction, a testimonial dinner was given in his honor at U.S. Robots. If Andrew saw an irony in this, he kept it to himself.\par
\tab Alvin Magdescu came out of retirement to chair the dinner. He was himself ninety-four years old and was alive because he, too, had prosthetized devices that, among other things, fulfilled the function of liver and kidneys. The dinner reached its climax when Magdescu, after a short and emotional talk, raised his glass to toast The Sesquicentennial Robot.\par
\tab Andrew had had the sinews of his face redesigned to the point where he could show a human range of emotions, but he sat through all the ceremonies solemnly passive. He did not like to be a Sesquicentennial Robot. \par
\par
\pard\qc 17.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 It was prosthetology that finally took Andrew off the Earth.\par
\tab In the decades that followed the celebration of his sesquicentennial, the Moon had come to be a world more Earthlike than Earth in every respect but its gravitational pull; and in its underground cities there was a fairly dense population. Prosthetized devices there had to take the lesser gravity into account. Andrew spent five years on the Moon working with local prosthetologists to make the necessary adaptations. When not at his work, he wandered among the robot population, every one of which treated him with the robotic obsequiousness due a man.\par
\tab He came back to an Earth that was humdrum and quiet in comparison, and visited the offices of Feingold and Martin to announce his return.\par
\tab The current head of the firm, Simon DeLong, was surprised. \ldblquote We had been told you were returning, Andrew\rdblquote -- he had almost said Mr. Martin-- \ldblquote but we were not expecting you till next week.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I grew impatient,\rdblquote  said Andrew briskly. He was anxious to get to the point. \ldblquote On the Moon, Simon, I was in charge of a research team of twenty human scientists. I gave orders that no one questioned. The Lunar robots deferred to me as they would to a human being. Why, then, am I not a human being?\rdblquote\par
\tab A wary look entered DeLong\rquote s eyes. \ldblquote My dear Andrew, as you have just explained, you are treated as a human being by both robots and human beings. You are, therefore, a human being \i de facto\i0 .\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote To be a human being \i de facto\i0  is not enough. I want not only to be treated as one, but to be legally identified as one. I want to be a human being \i de jure\i0 .\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Now, that is another matter,\rdblquote  DeLong said. \ldblquote There we would run into human prejudice and into the undoubted fact that, however much you may be like a human being, you are \i not\i0  a human being.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote In what way not?\rdblquote  Andrew asked. \ldblquote I have the shape of a human being and organs equivalent to those of a human being. My organs, in fact, are identical to some of those in a prosthetized human being. I have contributed artistically, literally, and scientifically to human culture as much as any human being now alive. What more can one ask?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I myself would ask nothing more. The trouble is that it would take an act of the World Legislature to define you as a human being. Frankly, I wouldn\rquote t expect that to happen.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote To whom on the Legislature could I speak?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote To the Chairman of the Science and Technology Committee, perhaps.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Can you arrange a meeting?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote But you scarcely need an intermediary. In your position, you can--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No. \i You\i0  arrange it.\rdblquote  It didn\rquote t even occur to Andrew that he was giving a fiat order to a human being. He had grown so accustomed to that on the Moon. \ldblquote I want him to know that the firm of Feingold and Martin is backing me in this to the hilt.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Well, now--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote To the hilt, Simon. In one hundred and seventy-three years I have in one fashion or another contributed greatly to this firm. I have been under obligation to individual members of the firm in times past. I am not, now. It is rather the other way around now and I am calling in my debts.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I will-- do what I can,\rdblquote  DeLong said. \par
\par
\pard\qc 18.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 The Chairman of the Science and Technology Committee was from the East Asian region and was a woman. Her name was Chee Li-hsing and her transparent garments-- obscuring what she wanted obscured only by their dazzle-- made her look plastic-wrapped. \ldblquote I sympathize with your wish for full human rights,\rdblquote  she said. \ldblquote There have been times in history when segments of the human population fought for full human rights. What rights, however, can you possibly want that you do not have?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote As simple a thing as my right to life,\rdblquote  Andrew stated. \ldblquote A robot can be dismantled at any time.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote A human being can be executed at any time.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Execution can only follow due process of law. There is no trial needed for my dismantling. Only the word of a human being in authority is needed to end me. Besides-- besides--\rdblquote  Andrew tried desperately to allow no sign of pleading, but his carefully designed tricks of human expression and tone of voice betrayed him here. \ldblquote The truth is I want to be a man. I have wanted it through six generations of human beings.\rdblquote\par
\tab Li-hsing looked up at him out of darkly sympathetic eyes. \ldblquote The Legislature can pass a law declaring you one. They could pass a law declaring that a stone statue be defined as a man. Whether they will actually do so is, however, as likely in the first case as the second. Congress people are as human as the rest of the population and there is always that element of suspicion against robots.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Even now?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Even now. We would all allow the fact that you have earned the prize of humanity, and yet there would remain the fear of setting an undesirable precedent.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What precedent? I am the only free robot, the only one of my type, and there will never be another. You may consult U.S. Robots.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote `Never\rquote  is a long word, Andrew-- or, if you prefer, Mr. Martin-- since I will gladly give you my personal accolade as man. You will find that most congress people will not be so willing to set the precedent, no matter how meaningless such a precedent might be. Mr. Martin, you have my sympathy, but I cannot tell you to hope. Indeed--\rdblquote\par
\tab She sat back and her forehead wrinkled. \ldblquote Indeed, if the issue grows too heated, there might well arise a certain sentiment, both inside the Legislature and out side, for that dismantling you mentioned. Doing away with you could turn out to be the easiest way of resolving the dilemma. Consider that before deciding to push matters.\rdblquote\par
\tab Andrew stood firm. \ldblquote Will no one remember the technique of prosthetology, something that is almost entirely mine?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It may seem cruel, but they won\rquote t. Or if they do, it will be remembered against you. People will say you did it only for yourself. It will be said it was part of a campaign to roboticize human beings, or to humanify robots; and in either case evil and vicious. You have never been part of a political hate campaign, Mr. Martin; but I tell you that you would be the object of vilification of a kind neither you nor I would credit, and there would be people to believe it all. Mr. Martin, let your life be.\rdblquote\par
\tab She rose, and next to Andrew\rquote s seated figure she seemed small and almost childlike.\par
\tab\ldblquote If I decide to fight for my humanity, will you be on my side?\rdblquote\par
\tab She thought, then replied, \ldblquote I will be-- insofar as I can be. If at any time such a stand would appear to threaten my political future, I might have to abandon you, since it is not an issue I feel to be at the very root of my beliefs. I am trying to be honest with you.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Thank you, and I will ask no more. I intend to fight this through, whatever the consequences, and I will ask you for your help only for as long as you can give it.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 19.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 It was not a direct fight. Feingold and Martin counseled patience and Andrew muttered, grimly, that he had an endless supply of that. Feingold and Martin then entered on a campaign to narrow and restrict the area of combat.\par
\tab They instituted a lawsuit denying the obligation to pay debts to an individual with a prosthetic heart on the grounds that the possession of a robotic organ removed humanity, and with it the constitutional rights of human beings. They fought the matter skillfully and tenaciously, losing at every step but always in such a way that the decision was forced to be as broad as possible, and then carrying it by way of appeals to the World Court.\par
\tab It took years, and millions of dollars.\par
\tab When the final decision was handed down, DeLong held what amounted to a victory celebration over the legal loss. Andrew was, of course, present in the company offices on the occasion.\par
\tab\ldblquote We\rquote ve done two things, Andrew,\rdblquote  said DeLong, \ldblquote both of which are good. First of all, we have established the fact that no number of artificial parts in the human body causes it to cease being a human body. Secondly, we have engaged public opinion in the question in such a way as to put it fiercely on the side of a broad interpretation of humanity, since there is not a human being in existence who does not hope for prosthetics if they will keep him alive.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote And do you think the Legislature will now grant me my humanity?\rdblquote  Andrew asked.\par
\tab DeLong looked faintly uncomfortable. \ldblquote As to that, I cannot be optimistic. There remains the one organ which the World Court has used as the criterion of humanity. Human beings have an organic cellular brain and robots have a platinum iridium positronic brain if they have one at all-- and you certainly have a positronic brain. No, Andrew, don\rquote t get that look in your eye. We lack the knowledge to duplicate the work of a cellular brain in artificial structures close enough to the organic type as to allow it to fall within the court\rquote s decision. Not even you could do it.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What should we do, then?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Make the attempt, of course. Congresswoman Li-hsing will be on our side and a growing number of other congress people. The President will undoubtedly go along with a majority of the Legislature in this matter.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Do we have a majority?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No. Far from it. But we might get one if the public will allow its desire for a broad interpretation of humanity to extend to you. A small chance, I admit; but if you do not wish to give up, we must gamble for it.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I do not wish to give up.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 20.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Congresswoman Li-hsing was considerably older than she had been when Andrew had first met her. Her transparent garments were long gone. Her hair was now close-cropped and her coverings were tubular. Yet still Andrew clung, as closely as he could within the limits of reasonable taste, to the style of clothing that had prevailed when he had first adopted clothing more than a century before.\par
\tab\ldblquote We\rquote ve gone as far as we can, Andrew,\rdblquote  Li-hsing admitted. \ldblquote We\rquote ll try once more after recess, but, to be honest, defeat is certain and then the whole thing will have to be given up. All my most recent efforts have only earned me certain defeat in the coming congressional campaign.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I know,\rdblquote  said Andrew, \ldblquote and it distressed me. You said once you would abandon me if it came to that. Why have you not done so?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote One can change one\rquote s mind, you know. Somehow, abandoning you became a higher price than I cared to pay for just one more term. As it is, I\rquote ve been in the Legislature , for over a quarter of a century. It\rquote s enough.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Is there no way we can change minds, Chee?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We\rquote ve changed all that are amenable to reason. The rest-- the majority-- cannot be moved from their emotional antipathies.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Emotional antipathy is not a valid reason for voting one way or the other.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I know that, Andrew, but they don\rquote t advance emotional antipathy as their reason.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It all comes down to the brain, then,\rdblquote  Andrew said cautiously. \ldblquote But must we leave it at the level of cells versus positrons? Is there no way of forcing a functional definition? Must we say that a brain is made of this or that? May we not say that a brain is something-- anything-- capable of a certain level of thought?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Won\rquote t work,\rdblquote  said Li-hsing. \ldblquote Your brain is manmade, the human brain is not. Your brain is constructed, theirs developed. To any human being who is intent on keeping up the barrier between himself and a robot, those differences are a steel wall a mile high and a mile thick.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote If we could get at the source of their antipathy, the very source--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote After all your years,\rdblquote  Li-hsing said, sadly, \ldblquote you are still trying to reason out the human being. Poor Andrew, don\rquote t be angry, but it\rquote s the robot in you that drives you in that direction.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t know,\rdblquote  said Andrew. \ldblquote If I could bring myself--\rdblquote  \par
\par
\pard\qc 1. (Reprise)\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 If he could bring himself--\par
\tab He had known for a long time it might come to that, and in the end he was at the surgeon\rquote s. He had found one, skillful enough for the job at hand-- which meant a surgeon-- robot, for no human surgeon could be trusted in this connection, either in ability or in intention.\par
\tab The surgeon could not have performed the operation on a human being, so Andrew, after putting off the moment of decision with a sad line of questioning that reflected the turmoil within himself, had put First Law to one side by saying \ldblquote I, too, am a robot.\rdblquote\par
\tab He then said, as firmly as he had learned to form the words even at human beings over these past decades, \ldblquote I \i order\i0  you to carry through the operation on me.\rdblquote\par
\tab In the absence of the First Law, an order so firmly given from one who looked so much like a man activated the Second Law sufficiently to carry the day. \par
\par
\pard\qc 21.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Andrew\rquote s feeling of weakness was, he was sure, quite imaginary. He had recovered from the-- operation. Nevertheless, he leaned, as unobtrusively as he could manage, against the wall. It would be entirely too revealing to sit.\par
\tab Li-hsing said, \ldblquote The final vote will come this week, Andrew. I\rquote ve been able to delay it no longer, and we must lose. And that will be it, Andrew.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I am grateful for your skill at delay. It gave me the time I needed, and I took the gamble I had to.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What gamble is this?\rdblquote  Li-hsing asked with open concern.\par
\tab\ldblquote I couldn\rquote t tell you, or even the people at Feingold and Martin. I was sure I would be stopped. See here, if it is the brain that is at issue, isn\rquote t the greatest difference of all the matter of immortality. Who really cares what a brain looks like or is built of or how it was formed. What matters is that human brain cells die; \i must\i0  die. Even if every other organ in the body is maintained or replaced, the brain cells, which cannot be replaced without changing and therefore killing the personality, must eventually die.\par
\tab\ldblquote My own positronic pathways have lasted nearly two centuries without perceptible change, and can last for centuries more. Isn\rquote t \i that\i0  the fundamental barrier? Human beings can tolerate an immortal robot, for it doesn\rquote t matter how long a machine lasts, but they cannot tolerate an immortal human being since their own mortality is endurable only so long as it is universal. And for that reason they won\rquote t make me a human being.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What is it you\rquote re leading up to, Andrew?\rdblquote  Li-hsing asked.\par
\tab\ldblquote I have removed that problem. Decades ago, my positronic brain was connected to organic nerves. Now, one last operation has arranged that connection in such a way that slowly-- quite slowly-- the potential is being drained from my pathways.\rdblquote\par
\tab Li-hsing\rquote s finely wrinkled face showed no expression for a moment. Then her lips tightened. \ldblquote Do you mean you\rquote ve arranged to die, Andrew? You can\rquote t have. That violates the Third Law.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No,\rdblquote  said Andrew, \ldblquote I have chosen between the death of my body and the death of my aspirations and desires. To have let my body live at the cost of the greater death is what would have violated the Third Law.\rdblquote\par
\tab Li-hsing seized his arm as though she were about to shake him. She stopped herself. \ldblquote Andrew, it won\rquote t work! Change it back.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It can\rquote t be done. Too much damage was done. I have a year to live more or less. I will last through the two-hundredth anniversary of my construction. I was weak enough to arrange that.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote How can it be worth it? Andrew, you\rquote re a fool.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote If it brings me humanity, that will be worth it. If it doesn\rquote t, it will bring an end to striving and that will be worth it, too.\rdblquote\par
\tab Then Li-hsing did something that astonished herself. Quietly, she began to weep. \par
\par
\pard\qc 22.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 It was odd how that last deed caught the imagination of the world. All that Andrew had done before had not swayed them. But he had finally accepted even death to be human, and the sacrifice was too great to be rejected.\par
\tab The final ceremony was timed, quite deliberately, for the two hundredth anniversary. The World President was to sign the act and make the people\rquote s will law. The ceremony would be visible on a global network and would be beamed to the Lunar state and even to the Martian colony.\par
\tab Andrew was in a wheelchair. He could still walk, but only shakily.\par
\tab With mankind watching, the World President said, \ldblquote Fifty years ago, you were declared The Sesquicentennial Robot, Andrew.\rdblquote  After a pause, and in a more solemn tone, he continued, \ldblquote Today we declare you The Bicentennial Man, Mr. Martin.\rdblquote\par
\tab And Andrew, smiling, held out his hand to shake that of the President. \par
\par
\pard\qc 23.\par
\pard\f2\par
\tab\f0 Andrew\rquote s thoughts were slowly fading as he lay in bed. Desperately he seized at them. Man! He was a man!\par
\tab He wanted that to be his last thought. He wanted to dissolve-- die with that.\par
\tab He opened his eyes one more time and for one last time recognized Li-hsing, waiting solemnly. Others were there, but they were only shadows, unrecognizable shadows. Only Li-hsing stood out against the deepening gray.\par
\tab Slowly, inchingly, he held out his hand to her and very dimly and faintly felt her take it.\par
\tab She was fading in his eyes as the last of his thoughts trickled away. But before she faded completely, one final fugitive thought came to him and rested for a moment on his mind before everything stopped.\par
\tab\ldblquote Little Miss,\rdblquote  he whispered, too low to be heard. \par
\par
\par
In the old days, one wrote science fiction for science fiction magazines. In fact, John Campbell once jokingly defined that indefinable field as follows: \ldblquote Science fiction is what science fiction editors buy.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Nowadays, however, all sorts of editors buy it, and I am prepared to receive requests from the unlikeliest sources. For instance, in the summer of 1975, I received a request from a magazine named \i High Fidelity \i0 to do a science fiction story that was 2,500 words long, that was set about twenty-five years in the future, and that dealt with some aspect of sound recording. \par
\tab I was intrigued by the narrowness of the boundary conditions, since that made it quite a challenge. Of course, I explained to the editor that I knew nothing about music or about sound recording, but that was pushed impatiently to one side as irrelevant. I started the story on September 18, 1975, and when I was through the editor liked it. He suggested some changes that would remove a bit of the aura of musical illiteracy on my part and then it appeared in the April 1976 issue of the magazine. \par
\par
\tab\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 Marching In\par
\pard\kerning0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\tab Jerome Bishop, composer and trombonist, had never been in a mental hospital before. \par
\tab There had been times when he had suspected he might be in one, someday, as a patient (who was safe?), but it had never occurred to him that he might ever be there as a consultant on a question of mental aberration. \i A consultant. \par
\tab\i0 He sat there, in the year 2001, with the world in pretty terrible shape, but (they said) pulling out of it, and then rose as a middle-aged women entered. Her hair was beginning to turn gray, and Bishop was thankfully conscious of his own hair still in full shock and evenly dark. \par
\tab\ldblquote Are you Mr. Bishop?\rdblquote  she asked. \par
\tab\ldblquote Last time I looked.\rdblquote  \par
\tab She held out her hand. \ldblquote I\rquote m Dr. Cray. Won\rquote t you come with me?\rdblquote  \par
\tab He shook her hand, then followed. He tried not to be haunted by the dull beige uniforms worn by everyone he passed. \par
\tab Dr. Cray put a finger to her lip, and motioned him into a chair. She pressed a button and the lights went out, causing a window, with a light behind it, to spring into view. Through the window, Bishop could see a woman in something that looked like a dentist\rquote s chair, tilted back. A forest of flexible wires sprang from her head, a thin narrow beam of light extended from pole to pole behind her, and a somewhat less narrow strip of paper unfolded upward. \par
\tab The light went on again; the view vanished. \par
\tab Dr. Cray said, \ldblquote Do you know what we\rquote re doing in there?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You\rquote re recording brain waves? Just a guess.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote A good guess. We are. It\rquote s a laser recording. Do you know how that works?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote My stuff\rquote s been recorded by laser,\rdblquote  said Bishop, crossing one leg over the other, \ldblquote but that doesn\rquote t mean I know how it \i works. \i0 It\rquote s the engineers who know the details. ...Look, Doc, if you have an idea I\rquote m a laser engineer, I\rquote m not.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, I know you\rquote re not,\rdblquote  said Dr. Cray hurriedly. \ldblquote You\rquote re here for something else. ...Let me explain it to you. We can alter a laser beam very delicately; much more rapidly and much more precisely than we can alter an electric current, or even a beam of electrons. That means that a very complex wave can be recorded in far greater detail than has ever been imagined before. We can make a tracing with a microscopically narrow laser beam and get a wave we can study under a microscope and get accurate detail invisible to the naked eye and unobtainable in any other fashion.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bishop said, \i ,.It \i0 that\rquote s what you want to consult me about, then all I can say is that it doesn\rquote t pay to get all that detail. You can only hear so much. \i It \i0 you sharpen a laser recording past a certain amount, you bring up the expense but you don\rquote t bring up the effect. In fact, some people say you get some kind of buzz that begins to drown out the music. I don\rquote t hear it myself, but I tell you that if you want the best, you don\rquote t narrow the laser beam all the way. ...Of course, maybe it\rquote s different with brain waves but what I told you is an I can tell you, so I\rquote ll go and there\rquote s no charge except for carfare.\rdblquote  \par
\tab He made as though to get up, but Dr. Cray was shaking her head vigorously. \par
\tab\ldblquote Please sit down, Mr. Bishop. Recording brain waves \i is \i0 different. There we do need all the detail we can get. Till now, all we\rquote ve ever had out of brain waves are the tiny, overlapping effects of ten billion brain cells, a kind of rough average that wipes out everything but the most general effects.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You mean like listening to ten billion pianos all playing different tunes a hundred miles away?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Exactly.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote All you get is noise?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Not quite. We do get some information-about epilepsy, for instance. With laser recording, however, we begin to get the fine detail; we begin to hear the individual tunes those separate pianos are playing; we begin to hear which particular pianos may be out of tune.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bishop lifted his eyebrows. \ldblquote So you can tell what makes a particular crazy person crazy?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In a way of speaking. Look at this.\rdblquote  In another corner of the room a screen flashed to life, with a thin wavering line over it. \ldblquote Do you see this, Mr. Bishop?\rdblquote  Dr. Cray pressed the button of an indicator in her hand and one little blip in the line reddened. The line moved along past the lighted screen and red blips appeared periodically. \par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s a microphotograph,\rdblquote  said Dr. Cray. \ldblquote Those little red discontinuities are not visible to the unaided eye and wouldn\rquote t be visible with any recording device less delicate than the laser. It appears only when this particular patient is in depression. The markings are more pronounced, the deeper the depression.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bishop thought about it for a while. Then he said, \ldblquote Can you do anything about it? So far, it just means you can tell by that blip there\rquote s a depression, which you can tell by just listening to the patient.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Quite right, but the details help. For instance, we can convert the brain waves into delicately flickering light waves and, what\rquote s more, into the equivalent sound waves. We use the same laser system that is used to record your music. We get a sort of dimly musical hum that matches the light flicker. I would like you to listen to it by earphone.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The music from that particular depressive person whose brain produced that line?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, and since we can\rquote t intensify it much without losing detail, we will ask you to listen by earphone.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And watch the light, too?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s not necessary. You can close your eyes. Enough of the flicker will penetrate the eyelids to affect the brain.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bishop closed his eyes. Through the hum, he could hear the tiny wail of a complex beat, a complex, sad beat that carried all the troubles of the tired old world in it. He listened, vaguely conscious of the dim light beating on his eyeballs in flickering time. \par
\tab He felt his shirt pulled at strenuously. \ldblquote Mr. Bishop--Mr. Bishop--\rdblquote  \par
\tab He took a deep breath. .\rquote Thanks!\rdblquote  he said, shuddering a little. \ldblquote That upset me, but I couldn\rquote t let go.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You were listening to brain-wave depression and it was affecting you. It was forcing your own brain-wave pattern to keep time. You felt depressed, didn\rquote t you?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote All the way.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well, if we can locate the portion of the wave characteristic of depression, or of any mental abnormality, remove that, and play all the rest of the brain wave, the patient\rquote s pattern will be modified into normal form.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote For how long?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote For a while after the treatment is stopped. For a while, but not long. A few days. A week. Then the patient has to return.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote That\rquote s better than nothing.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And less than enough. A person is born with certain genes, Mr. Bishop, that dictate a certain potential brain structure. A person suffers certain environmental influences. These are not easy things to neutralize, so here in this institution we\rquote ve been trying to find more efficient and long-lasting schemes for neutralization. ...And you can help us, perhaps. That\rquote s why we\rquote ve asked you to come here.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But I don\rquote t know anything about this, Doc. I never heard about recording brain waves by laser.\rdblquote  He pushed his hands apart, palms down. \ldblquote I\rquote ve got \i nothing \i0 for you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Dr. Cray looked impatient. She pushed her hands deep into the pockets of her jacket and said, \ldblquote Just a while ago, you said that the laser recorded more detail than the ear could hear.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes. I stand by that.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I know. One of my colleagues read an interview with you in the December 2000 issue of \i High Fidelity \i0 magazine, in which you said that. That\rquote s what attracted our attention. The ear can\rquote t get the laser detail, but the eye can, you see. It\rquote s the flickering light that alters the brain pattern to the norm, not the wavering sound. The sound alone will do nothing. It\b  \b0 will, however, reinforce the effect when the light is working.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You can\rquote t complain about that.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We can. The reinforcement isn\rquote t good enough. The gentle, delicate, almost infinitely complex variations produced in the sound by laser recording is lost on the ear. Too much is present and it drowns out the portion that is reinforcing.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What makes you think that a reinforcing portion is there?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Because occasionally, more or less by accident, we can produce something that seems to work better than the entire brain wave, but we don\rquote t see why. We need a musician. Maybe you. If you listen to both sets of brain waves, perhaps you can figure out by some insight a beat that will fit the normal set better than the abnormal one. Then that could reinforce the light, you see, and improve the effectiveness of the therapy.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Hey,\rdblquote  said Bishop in alarm, \ldblquote that\rquote s putting a lot of responsibility on me. When I write music, I\rquote m just caressing the ear and making the muscles jump. I\rquote m not trying to cure an ailing brain.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote All we ask is that you caress the ears and make the muscles jump, but do it so that it fits the normal music of the brain waves. ...And I assure you that you need fear no responsibility, Mr. Bishop. It is quite unlikely that your music would do harm, and it might do so much good. And you\rquote ll be paid, Mr. Bishop, win or lose.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bishop said, \ldblquote Well, I\rquote ll try, though I don\rquote t promise a thing.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\tab He was back in two days. Dr. Cray was pulled out of conference to see him. She looked at him out of tired, narrowed eyes. \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you have something?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I have \i something. \i0 It may work. \ldblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote How do you know?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t. I just have the feel of it. ...Look, I listened to the laser tapes you gave me; the brain-wave music as it came from the patient in depression and the brain-wave music as you\rquote ve modified it to normal. And you\rquote re right; without the flickering light it didn\rquote t affect me either way. Anyway, I subtracted the second from the first to see what the difference was.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You have a computer?\rdblquote  Dr. Cray said, wondering. \par
\tab\ldblquote No, a computer wouldn\rquote t have helped. It would give me too much. You take one complicated laser-wave pattern and subtract another complicated laser-wave pattern and you\rquote re left with what is still a pretty complicated laser-wave pattern. No, I subtracted it in my mind to see what kind of beat was left. ...That would be the abnormal beat that I would have to cancel out with a counter-beat.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How can you subtract in your head?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bishop looked impatient. \ldblquote I don\rquote t know. How did Beethoven hear the Ninth Symphony in his head before he wrote it down? The brain\rquote s a pretty good computer, too, isn\rquote t it?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I guess it is.\rdblquote  She subsided. \ldblquote Do you have the counterbeat there?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I think so. I have it here on an ordinary tape recording because it doesn\rquote t need anything more. It goes something like--dihdihdihDAH -dihdihdihDAH--dihdihdihDAHDAHDAHdihDAH--and so on. I added a tune to it and you can put it through the earphones while she\rquote s watching the flickering light that\rquote s matched to the normal brain-wave pattern. If I\rquote m right, it will reinforce the living daylights out of it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Are you sure?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If I were sure, you wouldn\rquote t have to try it, would you, Doc?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Dr. Cray was thoughtful for -a moment. \ldblquote I\rquote ll make an appointment with the patient. I\rquote d like you to be here.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If you want me. It\rquote s part of the consultation job, I suppose.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You won\rquote t be able to be in the treatment room, you understand, but I\rquote d want you out here.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Anything you say.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\tab The patient looked careworn when she arrived. Her eyelids drooped and her voice was low and she mumbled. \par
\tab Bishop\rquote s glance was casual as he sat quietly, unnoticed, in the corner. He saw her enter the treatment room and waited patiently, thinking: What if it works? Why not package brainwave lights with appropriate sound accompaniment to combat the blues-to increase energy-to heighten love? Not just for sick people but for normal people, who could find a substitute for all the pounding they\rquote d ever taken with alcohol or drugs in an effort to adjust their emotions-an utterly safe substitute based on the brain waves themselves. ...And finally, after forty-five minutes, she came out. \par
\tab She was placid now, and the lines had somehow washed out of her face. \par
\tab\ldblquote I feel better, Dr. Cray,\rdblquote  she said, smiling. \ldblquote I feel much better.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You usually do,\rdblquote  said Dr. Cray quietly. \par
\tab\ldblquote Not this way,\rdblquote  said the woman. \ldblquote Not this way. This time it\rquote s different. The other times, even when I thought I felt good, I could sense that awful depression in the back of my head just waiting to come back the minute I relaxed. Now--it\rquote s just gone.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Dr. Cray said, \ldblquote We can\rquote t be sure it will always be gone. We\rquote ll make an appointment for, say, two weeks from now but you\rquote ll call me before then if anything goes wrong, won\rquote t you? Did anything seem different in the treatment?\rdblquote  \par
\tab The woman thought a bit. \ldblquote No,\rdblquote  she said hesitantly. Then: \ldblquote The flickering light, though. That might have been different. Clearer and sharper somehow.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Did you hear anything?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Was I supposed to?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Dr. Cray rose. \ldblquote Very well. Remember to make that appointment with my secretary.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The woman stopped at the door, turned, and said, \ldblquote It\rquote s a happy feeling to feel happy,\rdblquote  and left. \par
\tab Dr. Cray said, \ldblquote She didn\rquote t hear anything, Mr. Bishop. I suppose that your counter-beat reinforced the normal brainwave pattern so naturally that the sound was, so to speak, lost in the light. ...And it may have worked, too.\rdblquote  \par
\tab She turned to Bishop, looking him full in the face. \ldblquote Mr. Bishop, will you consult with us on other cases? We\rquote ll pay you as much as we can, and if this turns out to be an effective therapy for mental disease, we\rquote ll see that you get all the credit due you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Bishop said, \ldblquote I\rquote ll be glad to help out, Doctor, but it won\rquote t be as hard as you may think. The work is already done.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Already done?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We\rquote ve had musicians for centuries. Maybe they didn\rquote t know about brain waves, but they did their best to get the melodies and beats that would affect people, get their toes tapping, get their muscles twitching, get their faces smiling, get their tear ducts pumping, get their hearts pounding. Those tunes are waiting. Once you get the counter-beat, you pick the tune to fit.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Is that what you did?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Sure. What can snap you out of depression like a revival hymn? It\rquote s what they\rquote re meant to do. The beat gets you out of yourself. It exalts you. Maybe it doesn\rquote t last long by itself, but if you use it to reinforce the normal brain-wave pattern, it ought to pound it in.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote A revival hymn?\rdblquote  Dr. Cray stared at him, wide-eyed. \par
\tab\ldblquote Sure. What I used in this case was the best of them all. I gave her \lquote When the Saints Go Marching In.\rquote  \ldblquote  \par
\tab He sang it softly, finger-snapping the beat, and by the third bar, Dr. Cray\rquote s toes were tapping. \par
\par
\par
This next one was requested by \i Bell Telephone Magazine \i0 over an excellent lunch. What they wanted was a 3,000-word story centering on a problem in communications. There were two broad requirements; first, that it be farther out than any of the methods of communication now under development by Bell Telephone, and, second, that I not postulate an end to the requirements for communications corporations. \par
\tab As it happened, Kim Armstrong, the editor of the magazine, who was at the lunch, was an extraordinarily charming woman, but I would have agreed to tackle the story anyway, because before the lunch was over I had a plot outline safely tucked away in my head. [\fs18 People ask me sometimes if I keep a notebook on me at all times to jot down ideas. I do, but it\rquote s inside my head, and therefore never gets mislaid\fs20 .]  I got to work on it on October 19, 1975. Ms. Armstrong liked it when it was done, and it appeared in the February 1976 issue of the magazine. \par
\par
\tab  \par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 Old-fashioned\i\par
\pard\kerning0\b0\f0\fs20\par
\tab\i0 Ben Estes knew he was going to die and it didn\rquote t make him feel any better to know that that was the chance he had lived with all these years. The life of an astro-miner, drifting through the still largely uncharted vastness of the asteroid belt, was not particularly sweet, but it was quite likely to be short. \par
\tab Of course, there was always the chance of a surprise find .that would make you rich for life, and this had been a surprise find all right. The biggest surprise in the world, but it wasn\rquote t going to make Estes rich. It would make him dead. \par
\tab Harvey Funarelli groaned softly from his bunk, and Estes turned, with a wince of his own as his muscles creaked. They had been badly mishandled. That he wasn\rquote t hit as viciously as Funarelli had been was surely because Funarelli was the larger man, and had been closer to the point of near-impact. \par
\tab Estes looked somberly at his partner and said, \ldblquote How do you feel, Harv?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli groaned again. \ldblquote I feel broken at every joint. What the hell happened? What did we hit?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes walked over, limping slightly, and said, \ldblquote Don\rquote t try to stand up.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I can make it,\rdblquote  said Funarelli, \ldblquote if you\rquote ll just reach out a hand. Wow! I wonder if I\rquote ve got a broken rib. Right here. What happened, Ben?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes pointed at the main portview. It wasn\rquote t a large one, but it was the best a two-man astro-mining vessel could be expected to have. Funarelli moved toward it very slowly, leaning on Estes\rquote  shoulder. He looked out. \par
\tab There were the stars, of course, but the experienced astronautic mind blanks those out. There are always the stars. Closer in, there was a gravel bank of boulders of varying size, all moving slowly relative to their neighbors like a swarm of very, very lazy bees. \par
\tab Funarelli said, \ldblquote I\rquote ve never seen anything like that before. What are they doing here?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Those rocks,\rdblquote  said Estes, \ldblquote are what\rquote s left of a shattered asteroid, I suspect, and they\rquote re still circling what shattered them, and what shattered us.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What?\rdblquote  Funarelli peered vainly into the darkness. \par
\tab Estes pointed. \ldblquote That!\rdblquote  There was a faint little sparkle in the direction he was pointing. \par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t see anything.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You\rquote re not supposed to. That\rquote s a black hole.\rdblquote  Funarelli\rquote s close-cropped black hair stood on end as a matter of course, and his staring dark eyes added a touch of horror. He said, \ldblquote You\rquote re crazy.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No. Black holes can come in all sizes. That\rquote s what the astronomers say. That one is about the mass of a large asteroid, I think, and we\rquote re moving around it. How else could something we can\rquote t see be holding us ill orbit?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There\rquote s no report on any--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I know. How can there be? It can\rquote t be seen. It\rquote s massOoops, there comes the Sun.\rdblquote  The slowly rotating ship had brought the Sun into view and the portview automatically polarized into opacity. \ldblquote Anyway,\rdblquote  said Estes, \ldblquote we discovered the first black hole actually to be encountered anywhere in the Universe. Only we won\rquote t live to see ourselves get the credit.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli said, \ldblquote What happened?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote We got close enough for the tidal effects to smash us up.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote What tidal effects?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes said, \ldblquote I\rquote m not an astronomer, but as I understand it, even when the total gravitational pull of a thing like that isn\rquote t large, you can get so close to it that the pull becomes intense. That intensity falls off so rapidly with increasing distance that the near end of an object is pulled far more strongly than the far end. The object is therefore stretched. The closer and bigger an object is, the worse the effect. Your muscles were torn. You\rquote re lucky your bones weren\rquote t broken.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli grimaced. \ldblquote I\rquote m not sure they aren\rquote t. ...What else happened?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The fuel tanks were destroyed. We\rquote re stuck here in orbit. ...It\rquote s just lucky we happened to end in one far enough away and circular enough to keep the tidal effect down. If we were closer, or if we even zoomed in closely at one end of the orbit--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Can we get word out?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Not a word,\rdblquote  said Estes. \ldblquote Communications are smashed.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote You can\rquote t fix it?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m not really a communications expert, but even if I were--It can\rquote t be fixed.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Can\rquote t something be jury-rigged?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes shook his head. \ldblquote We\rquote ve just got to wait-and die. That\rquote s not what bothers me so much.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It bothers me,\rdblquote  said Funarelli, sitting down on his bunk and placing his head in his hands. \par
\tab\ldblquote We\rquote ve got the pills,\rdblquote  said Estes. \ldblquote It would be an easy death. What\rquote s really bad is that we can\rquote t get word back about --that.\rdblquote  He pointed to the portview, which was clear again as the Sun moved out of range. \par
\tab\ldblquote About the black hole?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, it\rquote s dangerous. It seems to be in orbit about the Sun, but who knows whether that orbit is stable. And even if it is, it\rquote s bound to get larger.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\par
\tab\ldblquote I guess it will swallow stuff.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Sure. Everything it encounters. There\rquote s cosmic dust spiraling into it all the time, and giving off energy as it spirals and drops in. That\rquote s what makes those dim sparkles of light. Every once in a while, the hole will swallow up a large piece that gets in the way and there\rquote ll be a flash of radiation, right down to X rays. The larger it gets, the easier it is for it to drag in material from a greater and greater distance.\rdblquote  \par
\tab For a moment, both men stared at the portview, then Estes went on. \ldblquote Right now it can be handled maybe. If NASA can maneuver a fairly large asteroid here and send it past the hole in the proper way, the hole will be pulled out of its orbit by mutual gravitational attraction between itself and the asteroid. The hole can be made to curve itself into a path that could head it out of the Solar System, with some further help and acceleration.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli said, \ldblquote Do you suppose it started very small?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote It could have been a micro-hole formed at the time of the big bang, when the Universe was created. It may have been growing for billions of years and if it continues to grow, it may become unmanageable. It will then eventually become the grave of the Solar System.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Why haven\rquote t they found it?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No one\rquote s been looking. Who would expect a black bole in the asteroid belt? And it doesn\rquote t produce enough radiation to be noticeable, or enough mass to be noticeable. You have to run into it, as we did.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Are you sure we have no communications at all, Ben? ...How far to Vesta? They could reach us from Vesta without much delay. It\rquote s the largest base in the asteroid belt.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes shook his head. \ldblquote I don\rquote t know where Vesta is right now. The computer\rquote s knocked out, too.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote God! What isn\rquote t knocked out?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The air system is working. The water purifier is on. We\rquote ve got plenty of power and food. We can last two weeks, maybe more.\rdblquote  \par
\tab A silence fell. \ldblquote Look,\rdblquote  said Funarelli after a while. \ldblquote Even if we don\rquote t know where Vesta is exactly, we know it can\rquote t be more than a few million kilometers away. If we could reach them with some signal, they could get a drone ship out here within a week.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote A drone ship, yes,\rdblquote  said Estes. That was easy. An unmanned ship could be accelerated to levels that human flesh and blood would not endure. It could make trips in a third the time a manned vessel could. \par
\tab Funarelli closed his eyes, as though blocking out the pain, and said, \ldblquote Don\rquote t sneer at a drone ship. It could bring us emergency supplies, and it would have stuff on board we could use to set up a communications system. We could hold out till the real rescuers came.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes sat down on the other bunk. \ldblquote I wasn\rquote t sneering at a drone ship. I was just thinking that there\rquote s no way to send a signal, no way at all. We can\rquote t even yell. The vacuum of space won\rquote t carry sound. \ldblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli said stubbornly, \ldblquote I can\rquote t believe you can\rquote t think of something. Our lives depend on it. \ldblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The lives of all mankind depend on it, maybe, but I still can\rquote t think of anything. Why don\rquote t \i you \i0 think of something?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli grunted as he moved his hips. He seized the hand grips on the wall next to his bunk and pulled himself up to a standing position. \ldblquote I can think of one thing,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote why don\rquote t you turn off the gravity motors and save the power and put less strain on our muscles?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes muttered, \ldblquote Good idea.\rdblquote  He rose and moved to the control board, where he cut the gravity. \par
\tab Funarelli floated upward with a sigh and said, \ldblquote Why can\rquote t they \i find \i0 the black hole, the idiots?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You mean like we did? There\rquote s no other way. It\rquote s not doing enough.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli said, \ldblquote I still hurt, even with no gravity to fight\'85Oh well, if it keeps on hurting like this, it won\rquote t matter so much when it comes to pill-taking time. ...Is there any way we can make that black hole do more than it\rquote s doing?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes said grimly, \ldblquote If one of those bits of gravel should take it into its head to drop into the hole, a burst of X rays would shoot out.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Would they detect that on Vesta?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes shook his head. \ldblquote I doubt it. They\rquote re not looking for such a thing. They\rquote d be sure to detect it on Earth, though. Some of the space stations keep the sky under constant surveillance for radiation changes. They\rquote d pick up astonishingly small bursts.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote All right, Ben, reaching Earth would be just as well. They\rquote d send a message to Vesta to investigate. It would take the X rays about fifteen minutes to get to Earth and then it would take fifteen minutes for radio waves to get to Vesta. \ldblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And how about the time between? The receivers may automatically record a burst of X rays from such and such a direction, but who\rquote s to say where it\rquote s from? It could be from a distant galaxy that happens to lie in this particular direction. Some technician will notice the bump in the recording and will watch for more bursts in the same place and there won\rquote t be any and it will be crossed off as unimportant. Besides, it won\rquote t happen, Harv. There must have been lots of X rays when the black hole broke up this asteroid with its tidal effect, but that may have been thousands of years ago when no one was watching. Now what\rquote s left of these fragments must have fairly stable orbits.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If we had our rockets--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Let me guess. We could drive our ship into the black hole. Use our deaths to send a message. That wouldn\rquote t do any good either. It would still be one pulse from anywhere.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli said indignantly, \ldblquote I wasn\rquote t thinking of that. I\rquote m not in the market for heroic death. I meant, we\rquote ve got three engines. If we could rig them on to three pretty large size rocks and send each one into the hole, there would be three bursts of X rays and if we did them a day apart, the source would move detectably against the stars. That would be interesting, wouldn\rquote t it? The technicians would pick that up at once, wouldn\rquote t they?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Maybe, and maybe not. Besides, we don\rquote t have any rocketry left and couldn\rquote t put them on the rocks if we--\rdblquote  Estes fell silent. Then he said in an altered voice, \ldblquote I wonder if our space suits are intact.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Our suit radios,\rdblquote  said Funarelli excitedly. \par
\tab\ldblquote Hell, they don\rquote t reach out more than a few kilometers,\rdblquote  said Estes. \ldblquote I\rquote m thinking of something else. I\rquote m thinking of going out there.\rdblquote  He opened the suit locker. \ldblquote They \i seem \i0 all right.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Why do you want to go out?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote We may not have any rockets, but we still have muscle power. At least I have. Do you think you can throw a rock?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli made a throwing gesture, or the beginning of one, and a look of agony came over his face. \ldblquote Can I jump to the Sun?\rdblquote  he said. \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote ll go out and throw some. ...The suit seems to check out. Maybe I can throw some into the hole. ...I hope the air lock operates.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Can we spare the air?\rdblquote  said Funarelli anxiously. \par
\tab\ldblquote Will it matter in two weeks?\rdblquote  said Estes wearily. \par
\tab Every astro-miner has to get outside the ship occasionally --to carry out some repair, to bring in some chunk of matter in the vicinity. Ordinarily, it\rquote s an exciting time. In any case, it\rquote s a change. \par
\tab Estes felt little excitement, only a vast anxiety. His notion was so damned primitive, he felt foolish to have it. It was bad enough dying without having to die a damn fool. \par
\tab He found himself in the black of space, with the glittering stars he had seen a hundred times before. Now, though, in the faint reflection of the small and distant Sun, there was the dim glow of hundreds of bits of rock that must once have been part of an asteroid and that now formed a tiny Saturn\rquote s ring about a black hole. The rocks seemed almost motionless, as all drifted along with the ship. \par
\tab Estes judged the direction of wheel of the stars and knew that ship and rocks were moving slowly in the other direction. If he could throw a rock in the direction of the star motion, he would neutralize some of the rock\rquote s velocity relative to the black hole. If he neutralized not enough of the velocity, or too much, the rock would drop toward the hole, skim about it, and come back to the point it had left. If he neutralized just enough, it would come close enough to be powdered by the tidal effect. The grains of powder, in their motions, would slow each other and spiral into the hole, releasing X rays as they did so. \par
\tab Estes used his miner\rquote s net of tantalum steel to gather rocks, choosing them fist size. He was thankful that modern suits allowed complete freedom of motion and were not the virtual coffins they had been when the first astronauts, over a century ago, had reached the Moon. \par
\tab Once he had enough rocks, he threw one, and he could see it glimmer and fade in the sunlight as it dropped toward the hole. He waited and nothing happened. He didn\rquote t know how long it might take to fall into the black hole-if it fell in at all, that is--but he counted six hundred to himself and threw again. \par
\tab Over and over he did so, with a terrible patience born of searching for an alternative to death, and finally there was a sudden blaze in the direction of the black hole. Visible light and, he knew, a burst of higher-energy radiation as far as X rays at least. \par
\tab He had to stop to gather more rocks, and then he got the range. He was hitting it almost every time. He oriented himself so that the soft glimmer of the black hole would be seen just above the midportion of the ship. That was one relationship that didn\rquote t change as the ship circled and rolled on an axis--or changed least. \par
\tab Even allowing for his care, however, it seemed to him he was making too many strikes. The black hole, he thought, was more massive than he knew and would swallow up its prey from a larger distance. That made it more dangerous, but increased their chance of rescue. \par
\tab He worked his way through the lock and back into the ship. He was bone-weary and his right shoulder hurt him. \par
\par
\tab Funarelli helped him off with the suit. \ldblquote That was terrific. You were throwing rocks into the black hole.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Estes nodded. \ldblquote Yes, and I\rquote m hoping my suit has been stopping the X rays. I\rquote d just as soon not die of radiation poisoning.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote They\rquote ll see this back on Earth, won\rquote t they?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m sure they will,\rdblquote  said Estes, \ldblquote but will they pay attention? They\rquote ll record it all and wonder about it. But what\rquote s going to make them come out here for a closer look? I\rquote ve got to work out something that will make them come, after I have just a little time to rest.\rdblquote  \par
\tab An hour later, he lifted out another space suit. No time to wait for the recharge of the solar batteries in the first one. He said, \ldblquote I hope I haven\rquote t lost the range.\rdblquote  \par
\par
\tab He was out again, and it had become clear that even allowing a fairly wide spread of velocities and direction, the black hole would suck up the slowing rocks as they moved inward. \par
\tab Estes gathered as many rocks as he could manage and placed them carefully on an indentation in the hull of the ship. They didn\rquote t stay there, but they drifted only exceedingly slowly, and even after Estes had collected all he could, those he had placed there first had spread out no more than billiard balls on a pool table. \par
\tab Then he threw them, at first tensely, and then with growing confidence, and the black hole flashed--and flashed--and flashed. \par
\tab It seemed to him that the target became steadily easier to hit and that the black hole was growing madly with each impact and that soon it would reach out and suck him and the ship into its never-sated maw. \par
\tab It was his imagination, of course, and nothing more. Finally all the rocks were gone and he felt he could throw nothing more in any case. He had been out there, it seemed, for hours. \par
\par
\tab When he was within the ship again he said, as soon as Funarelli had helped him off with his helmet, \ldblquote That\rquote s it. I can\rquote t do anything more.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You had plenty of flashes there,\rdblquote  said Funarelli. \par
\tab\ldblquote Plenty, and they should surely be recorded. We\rquote ll just have to wait now. They\rquote ve \i got \i0 to come.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Funarelli helped him off with the rest of his suit as best his muscle-torn body would allow. Then he stood, grunting and gasping, and said, \ldblquote Do you really think they\rquote ll come, Ben?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I think they\rquote ve got to,\rdblquote  said Estes, almost as though he were trying to force the event by the sheer power of wishing. \ldblquote I think they\rquote ve \i got \i0 to.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Why do you think they\rquote ve got to?\rdblquote  said Funarelli, sounding like a man who wanted to grasp at straws but didn\rquote t dare. \par
\tab\ldblquote Because I \i communicated,\rdblquote  \i0 said Estes. \ldblquote We\rquote re not only the first people to encounter a black hole, we\rquote re the first to use it to communicate; we\rquote re the first to use the ultimate communication system of the future, the one that might send messages from star to star and galaxy to galaxy, and that might be the ultimate energy source as well--\rdblquote  He was panting, and he sounded a little wild. \par
\tab\ldblquote What are you talking about?\rdblquote  said Funarelli. \par
\tab\ldblquote I threw those rocks in rhythm, Harv,\rdblquote  said Estes, \ldblquote and the X-ray bursts came in rhythm. It was flash-flash-flash--flash--flash--flash--flash-flash-flash, and so on.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s old-fashioned; \i old-\i0 fashioned\i , \i0 but that\rquote s one thing everyone remembers from the days when people communicated by electric currents running through wires.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You mean the photograph--phonograph--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The telegraph, Harv. Those flashes I produced will be recorded and the first time someone looks at that record, all hell will break loose. It\rquote s not just that they\rquote ll be spotting an X-ray source; it\rquote s not just that it will be an X-ray source moving very slowly against the stars so that it has to be within our Solar System. What it is, is that they\rquote ll be seeing an X-ray source going on and off and producing the signal sos--sos--And when an X-ray Source is shouting for help, you\rquote ll bet they\rquote ll come--as fast as they can--if only to see--what\rquote s--there--that--\rdblquote  \par
\tab He was asleep. \par
\tab --And five days later, a drone ship arrived. \par
\par
\par
Incidentally, it may occur to some of my Gentle Readers that there is a certain similarity between the story and my very first published story, MAROONED OFF VESTA, which appeared in print thirty-seven years earlier. In each story, two men are trapped on a spaceship wrecked in the asteroid belt and must use their ingenuity to devise a way of escaping what looked like certain death. \par
\tab Of course, the resolutions are completely different, and it was in my mind to demonstrate some of the changes in our outlook on the Universe that took place in those thirty-seven years by producing in 1976 a resolution that would have been inconceivable in 1939. \par
\par
\par
In the fall of 1975, Fred Dannay (better known as Ellery Queen) approached me with a very intriguing idea for the August 1976 issue of \i Ellery Queen\rquote s Mystery Magazine, \i0 which would be on the stands at the time of the Bicentennial. He planned to publish a mystery dealing with the Bicentennial itself, and another dealing with the Centennial in 1876. What he needed now was one for the Tricentennial in 2076 and, of course, that meant a science fiction story. \par
\tab Since I have been writing numerous mystery stories for the magazine in recent years, he thought of me and proposed that I tackle the job. I agreed and got to work on November 1, 1975. I ended with uncompromising science fiction which I feared might make a little heavy going for mystery readers. Fred thought otherwise, apparently, for he took the story and was even kind enough to pay me a bonus. \par
\tab\par
\tab\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\b\f1\fs32 The Tercentenary Incident \par
\pard\kerning0\b0\f0\fs20\tab\par
\tab July 4, 2076--and for the third time the accident of the conventional system of numeration, based on powers of ten, had brought the last two digits of the year back to the fateful 76 that had seen the birth of the nation. \par
\tab It was no longer a nation in the old sense; it was rather a geographic expression; part of a greater whole that made up the Federation of all of humanity on Earth, together with its offshoots on the Moon and in the space colonies. By culture and heritage, however, the name and the \i idea \i0 lived on, and that portion of the planet signified by the old name was still the most prosperous and advanced region of the world....And the President of the United States was still the most powerful single figure in the Planetary Council. \par
\tab Lawrence Edwards watched the small figure of the President from his height of two hundred feet. He drifted lazily above the crowd, his flotron motor making a barely heard chuckle on his back, and what he saw looked exactly like what anyone would see on a holovision scene. How many times had he seen little figures like that in his living room, little figures in a cube of sunlight, looking as real as though they were living homunculi, except that you could put your hand through them. \par
\tab You couldn\rquote t put your hand through those spreading out in their tens of thousands over the open spaces surrounding the Washington Monument. And you couldn\rquote t put your hand through the President. You could reach out to him instead, touch him, and shake his hand. \par
\tab Edwards thought sardonically of the uselessness of that added element of tangibility and wished himself a hundred miles away, floating in air over some isolated wilderness, instead of here where he had to watch for any sign of disorder. There wouldn\rquote t be any necessity for his being here but for the mythology of the value of \ldblquote pressing the flesh.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards was not an admirer of the President--Hugo Allen Winkler, fifty-seventh of the line. \par
\tab To Edwards, President Winkler seemed an empty man, a charmer, a vote grabber, a promiser. He was a disappointing man to have in office now after all the hopes of those first months of his administration. The World Federation was in danger of breaking up long before its job had been completed and Winkler could do nothing about it. One needed a strong hand now, not a glad hand; a hard voice, not a honey voice. \par
\tab There he was now, shaking hands--a space forced around him by the Service, with Edwards himself, plus a few others of the Service, watching from above. \par
\tab The President would be running for re-election certainly, and there seemed a good chance he might be defeated. That would just make things worse, since the opposition party was dedicated to the destruction of the Federation. \par
\tab Edwards sighed. It would be a miserable four years coming up--maybe a miserable forty--and all he could do was float in the air, ready to reach every Service agent on the ground by laser-phone if there was the slightest\par
\tab He didn\rquote t see the slightest. There was no sign of disturbance. Just a little puff of white dust, hardly visible; just a momentary glitter in the sunlight, up and away, gone as soon as he was aware of it. \par
\tab Where was the President? He had lost sight of him in the dust. He looked about in the vicinity of where he had seen him last. The President could not have moved far. \par
\tab Then he became aware of disturbance. First it was among the Service agents themselves, who seemed to have gone off their heads and to be moving this way and that jerkily. Then those among the crowd near them caught the contagion and then those farther off. The noise rose and became a thunder. \par
\tab Edwards didn\rquote t have to hear the words that made up the rising roar. It seemed to carry the news to him by nothing more than its mass clamorous urgency. President Winkler had disappeared! He had been there one moment and had turned into a handful of vanishing dust the next. \par
\tab Edwards held his breath in an agony of waiting during what seemed a drug-ridden eternity, for the long moment of realization to end and for the mob to break into a mad, rioting stampede. \par
\tab --When a resonant voice sounded over the gathering din, and at its sound, the noise faded, died, and became a silence. It was as though it were all a holovision program after all and someone had turned the sound down and out. \par
\tab Edwards thought: My God, it\rquote s the President. There was no mistaking the voice. Winkler stood on the guarded stage from which he was to give his Tercentenary speech, and from which he had left but ten minutes ago to shake hands with some in the crowd. \par
\tab How had he gotten back there? Edwards listened\par
\tab\ldblquote Nothing has happened to me, my fellow Americans. What you have seen just now was the breakdown of a mechanical device. It was not your President, so let us not allow a mechanical failure to dampen the celebration of the happiest day the world has yet seen....My fellow Americans, give me your attention--\rdblquote  \par
\tab And what followed was the Tercentenary speech, the greatest speech Winkler had ever made, or Edwards had ever heard. Edwards found himself forgetting his supervisory job in his eagerness to listen. \par
\tab Winkler had it right! He understood the importance of the Federation and he was getting it \i across. \par
\tab\i0 Deep inside, though, another part of him was remembering the persistent rumors that the new expertise in robotics had resulted in the construction of a look-alike President, a robot who could perform the purely ceremonial functions, who could shake hands with the crowd, who could be neither bored nor exhausted--nor assassinated. \par
\tab Edwards thought, in obscure shock, that that was how it had happened. There had been such a look-alike robot indeed, and in a way--it had been assassinated. \par
\tab October 13, 2078\par
\tab Edwards looked up as the waist-high robot guide approached and said mellifluously, \ldblquote Mr. Janek will see you now.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards stood up, feeling tall as he towered above the stubby, metallic guide. He did not feel young, however. His face had gathered lines in the last two years or so and he was aware of it. \par
\tab He followed the guide into a surprisingly small room, where, behind a surprisingly small desk, there sat Francis Janek, a slightly paunchy and incongruously young-looking man. \par
\tab Janek smiled and his eyes were friendly as he rose to shake hands. \ldblquote Mr. Edwards.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards muttered, \ldblquote I\rquote m glad to have the opportunity, sir--\rdblquote  Edwards had never seen Janek before, but then the job of personal secretary to the President is a quiet one and makes little news. \par
\tab Janek said, \ldblquote Sit down. Sit down. Would you care for a soya stick?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards smiled a polite negative, and sat down. Janek was clearly emphasizing his youth. His ruffied shirt was open and the hairs on his chest had been dyed a subdued but definite violet. \par
\tab Janek said, \ldblquote I know you have been trying to reach me for some weeks now. I\rquote m sorry for the delay. I hope you understand that my time is not entirely my own. However, we\rquote re here now....I have referred to the Chief of the Service, by the way, and he gave you very high marks. He regrets your resignation.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said, eyes downcast, \ldblquote It seemed better to carry on my investigations without danger of embarrassment to the Service.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek\rquote s smile flashed. \ldblquote Your activities, though discreet, have not gone unnoticed, however. The Chief explains that you have been investigating the Tercentenary Incident, and I must admit it was that which persuaded me to see you as soon as I could. You\rquote ve given up your position for that? You\rquote re investigating a dead issue.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How can it be a dead issue, Mr. Janek? Your calling it an Incident doesn\rquote t alter the fact that it was an assassination attempt.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote A matter of semantics. Why use a disturbing phrase?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Only because it would seem to represent a disturbing truth. Surely you would say that someone tried to kill the President.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek spread his hands. \ldblquote If that is so, the plot did not succeed. A mechanical device was destroyed. Nothing more. In fact, if we look at it properly, the Incident--whatever you choose to call it--did the nation and the world an enormous good. As we all know, the President was shaken by the Incident and the nation as well. The President and all of us realized what a return to the violence of the last century might mean and it produced a great turnaround.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I can\rquote t deny that.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Of course you can\rquote t. Even the President\rquote s enemies will grant that the last two years have seen great accomplishments. The Federation is far stronger today than anyone could have dreamed it would be on that Tercentenary day. We might even say that a breakup of the global economy has been prevented.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said cautiously, \ldblquote Yes, the President is a changed man. Everyone says so.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek said, \ldblquote He was a great man always. The Incident made him concentrate on the great issues with a fierce intensity, however.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Which he didn\rquote t do before?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Perhaps not quite as intensely....In effect then, the President, and all of us, would like the Incident forgotten. My main purpose in seeing you, Mr. Edwards, is to make that plain to you. This is not the Twentieth Century and we can\rquote t throw you in jail for being inconvenient to us, or hamper you in any way, but even the Global Charter doesn\rquote t forbid us to attempt persuasion. Do you understand me?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I understand you, but I do not agree with you. Can we forget the Incident when the person responsible has never been apprehended?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Perhaps that is just as well, too, sir. Far better that some, uh, unbalanced person escape than that the matter be blown out of proportion and the stage set, possibly, for a return to the days of the Twentieth Century.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The official story even states that the robot spontaneously exploded--which is impossible, and which has been an unfair blow to the robot industry.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote A robot is not the term I would use, Mr. Edwards. It was a mechanical device. No one has said that robots are dangerous, per se, certainly not the workaday metallic ones. The only reference here is to the unusually complex manlike devices that seem flesh and blood and that we might call androids. Actually, they are so complex that perhaps they might explode at that; I am not an expert in the field. The robotics industry will recover.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Nobody in the government,\rdblquote  said Edwards stubbornly, \ldblquote seems to care whether we reach the bottom of the matter or not.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote ve already explained that there have been no consequences but good ones. Why stir the mud at the bottom, when the water above is clear?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And the use of the disintegrator?\rdblquote  \par
\tab For a moment, Janek\rquote s hand, which had been slowly turning the container of soya sticks on his desk, held still, then it returned to its rhythmic movement. He said lightly, \ldblquote What\rquote s that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said intently, \ldblquote Mr. Janek, I think you know what I mean. As part of the Service--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote To which you no longer belong, of course:\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Nevertheless, as part of the Service, I could not help but hear things that were not always, I suppose, for my ears. I had heard of a new weapon, and I saw something happen at the Tercentenary which would require one. The object everyone thought was the President disappeared into a cloud of very fine dust. It was as though every atom within the object had had its bonds to other atoms loosed. The object had become a cloud of individual atoms, which began to combine again of course, but which dispersed too quickly to do more than appear a momentary glitter of dust.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Very science-fictionish.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I certainly don\rquote t understand the science behind it, Mr. Janek, but I do see that it would take considerable energy to accomplish such bond breaking. This energy would have to be withdrawn from the environment. Those people who were standing near the device at the time, and whom I could locate--and who would agree to talk--were unanimous in reporting a wave of coldness washing over them.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek put the soya-stick container to one side with a small click of transite against cellulite. He said, \ldblquote Suppose just for argument that there is such a thing as a disintegrator.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You need not argue. There is.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I won\rquote t argue. I know of no such thing myself, but in my office, I am not likely to know of anything so security-bound as new weaponry. But if a disintegrator exists and is as secret as all that, it must be an American monopoly, unknown to the rest of the Federation. It would then not be something either you or I should talk about. It could be a more dangerous war weapon than the nuclear bombs, precisely because--if what you say is so--it produces nothing more than disintegration at the point of impact and cold in the immediate neighborhood. No blast, no fire, no deadly radiation. Without these distressing side effects, there would be no deterrent to its use, yet for all we know it might be made large enough to destroy the planet itself.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I go along with all of that,\rdblquote  said Edwards. \par
\tab\ldblquote Then you see that if there is no disintegrator, it is foolish to talk about one; and if there \i is \i0 a disintegrator, then it is criminal to talk about one.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I haven\rquote t discussed it, except to you, just now, because I\rquote m trying to persuade you of the seriousness of the situation. If one had been used, for instance, ought not the government be interested in deciding how it came to be used--if another unit of the Federation might be in possession?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek shook his head. \ldblquote I think that we can rely on appropriate organs of this government to take such a thing into consideration. You had better not concern yourself with the matter.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said, in barely controlled impatience, \ldblquote Can you assure me that the United States is the only government that has such a weapon at its disposal?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I can\rquote t tell you, since I know nothing about such a weapon, and should not know. You should not have spoken of it to me. Even if no such weapon exists, the \i rumor \i0 of its existence could be damaging.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But since I have told you and the damage is done, please hear me out. Let me have the chance of convincing you that \i you, \i0 and no one else, hold the key to a fearful situation that perhaps I alone see.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You alone see? I alone hold the key?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Does that sound paranoid? Let me explain and then judge for yourself.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I will give you a little more time, sir, but what I have said stands. You must abandon this--this hobby of yours--this investigation. It is terribly dangerous.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It is its abandonment that would be dangerous. Don\rquote t you see that if the disintegrator exists and if the United States has the monopoly of it, then it follows that the number of people who could have access to one would be sharply limited. As an ex-member of the Service, I have some practical knowledge of this and I tell you that the only person in the world who could manage to abstract a disintegrator from our top-secret arsenals would be the President....Only the President of the United States, Mr. Janek, could have arranged that assassination attempt.\rdblquote  \par
\tab They stared at each other for a moment and then Janek touched a contact at his desk. \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote Added precaution. No one can overhear us now by any means. Mr. Edwards, do you realize the danger of that statement? To yourself? You must not overestimate the power of the Global Charter. A government has the right to take reasonable measures for the protection of its stability.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said, \ldblquote I\rquote m approaching you, Mr. Janek, as someone I presume to be a loyal American citizen. I come to you with news of a terrible crime that affects all Americans and the entire Federation. A crime that has produced a situation that perhaps only you can right. Why do you respond with threats?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek said, \ldblquote That\rquote s the second time you have tried to make it appear that I am a potential savior of the world. I can\rquote t conceive of myself in that role. You understand, I hope, that I have no unusual powers.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You are the secretary to the President.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote That does \i not \i0 mean I have special access to him or am in some intimately confidential relationship to him. There are times, Mr. Edwards, when I suspect others consider me to be nothing more than a flunky, and there are even times when I find myself in danger of agreeing with them.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Nevertheless, you see him frequently, you see him informally, you see him--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek said impatiently, \ldblquote I see enough of him to be able to assure you that the President would not order the destruction of that mechanical device on Tercentenary day.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Is it in your opinion impossible, then?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I did not say that. I said he would not. After all, why should he? Why should the President want to destroy a look-alike android that had been a valuable adjunct to him for over three years of his Presidency? And if for some reason he wanted it done, why on Earth should he do it in so incredibly public a way--at the Tercentenary, no less--thus advertising its existence, risking public revulsion at the thought of shaking hands with a mechanical device, to say nothing of the diplomatic repercussions of having had representatives of other parts of the Federation treat with one? He might, instead, simply have ordered it disassembled in private. No one but a few highly placed members of the Administration would have known.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There have not, however, been any undesirable consequences for the President as a result of the Incident, have there?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote He has had to cut down on ceremony. He is no longer as accessible as he once was.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote As the robot once was.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Well,\rdblquote  said Janek uneasily. \ldblquote Yes, I suppose that\rquote s right.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said, \ldblquote And, as a matter of fact, the President was re-elected and his popularity has not diminished even though the destruction was public. The argument against public destruction is not as powerful as you make it sound.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But the re-election came about \i despite \i0 the Incident. It was brought about by the President\rquote s quick action in stepping forward and delivering what you will have to admit was one of the great speeches of American history. It was an absolutely amazing performance; you will have to admit that.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It was a beautifully staged drama. The President, one might think, would have counted on that.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek sat back in his chair. \ldblquote If I understand you, Edwards, you are suggesting an involuted storybook plot. Are you trying to say that the President had the device destroyed, just as it was--in the middle of a crowd, at precisely the time of the Tercentenary celebration, with the world watching--so that he could win the admiration of all by his quick action? Are you suggesting that he arranged it all so that he could establish himself as a man of unexpected vigor and strength under extremely dramatic circumstances and thus turn a losing campaign into a winning one? ...Mr. Edwards, you\rquote ve been reading fairy tales.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said, \ldblquote If I were trying to claim all this, it would indeed be a fairy tale, but I am not. I never suggested that the President ordered the killing of the robot. I merely asked if you thought it were possible and you have stated quite strongly that it wasn\rquote t. I\rquote m glad you did, because I agree with you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Then what is all this? I\rquote m beginning to think you\rquote re wasting my time.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Another moment, please. Have you ever asked yourself why the job couldn\rquote t have been done with a laser beam, with a field deactivator--with a sledgehammer, for God\rquote s sake? Why should anyone go to the incredible trouble of getting a weapon guarded by the strongest possible government security to do a job that didn\rquote t require such a weapon? Aside from the difficulty of getting it, why risk revealing the existence of a disintegrator to the rest of the world?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote This whole business of a disintegrator is just a theory of yours.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote The robot disappeared completely before my eyes. I was watching. I rely on no secondhand evidence for that. It doesn\rquote t matter what you call the weapon; whatever name you give it, it had the effect of taking the robot apart atom by atom and scattering all those atoms irretrievably. Why should this be done? It was tremendous overkill.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t know what was in the mind of the perpetrator.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote No? Yet it seems to me that there is only one logical reason for a complete powdering when something much simpler would have carried through the destruction. The powdering left no trace behind of the destroyed object. It left nothing to indicate what it had been, whether robot or anything else.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek said, \ldblquote But there is no question of what it was.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Isn\rquote t there? I said only the President could have arranged for a disintegrator to be obtained and used. But, considering the existence of a look-alike robot, which President did the arranging?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek said harshly, \ldblquote I don\rquote t think we can carry on this conversation. You are mad.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said, \ldblquote Think it through. For God\rquote s sake, think it through. The President did not destroy the robot. Your arguments there are convincing. What happened was that the robot destroyed the President. President Winkler was killed in the crowd on July 4, 2076. A robot resembling President Winkler then gave the Tercentenary speech, ran for re-election, was re-elected, and still serves as President of the United States!\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Madness!\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote ve come to you, to \i you \i0 because \i you \i0 can prove this--and correct it, too.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It is simply not so. The President is--the President.\rdblquote  Janek made as though to rise and conclude the interview. \par
\tab\ldblquote You yourself say he\rquote s changed,\rdblquote  said Edwards quickly and urgently. \ldblquote The Tercentenary speech was beyond the powers of the old Winkler. Haven\rquote t you been yourself amazed at the accomplishments of the last two years? Truthfully--could the Winkler of the first term have done all this?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes, he could have, because the President of the second term is the President of the first term.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Do you deny he\rquote s changed? I put it to you. \i You \i0 decide and I\rquote ll abide by your decision.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote He\rquote s risen to meet the challenge, that is all. It\rquote s happened before this in American history.\rdblquote  But Janek sank back into his seat. He looked uneasy. \par
\tab\ldblquote He doesn\rquote t drink,\rdblquote  said Edwards. \par
\tab\ldblquote He never did--very much.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote He no longer womanizes. Do you deny he did so in the past?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote A President is a man. For the last two years, however, he\rquote s felt dedicated to the matter of the Federation.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It\rquote s a change for the better, I admit,\rdblquote  said Edwards, \ldblquote but it\rquote s a change. Of course, if he \i had \i0 a woman, the masquerade could not be carried on, could it?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek said, \ldblquote Too bad he doesn\rquote t have a wife.\rdblquote  He pronounced the archaic word a little self-consciously. \ldblquote The whole matter wouldn\rquote t arise if he did.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote The fact that he doesn\rquote t made the plot more practical. Yet he has fathered two children. I don\rquote t believe they have been in the White House, either one of them, since the Tercentenary.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Why should they be? They are grown, with lives of their own.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Are they invited? Is the President interested in seeing them? You\rquote re his private secretary. You would know. Are they?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek said, \ldblquote You\rquote re wasting time. A robot can\rquote t kill a human being. You know that that is the First Law of Robotics.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I know it. But no one is saying that the robot-Winkler killed the human-Winkler directly. When the human-Winkler was in the crowd, the robot-Winkler was on the stand and I doubt that a disintegrator could be aimed from that distance without doing more widespread damage. Maybe it could, but more likely the robot-Winkler had an accomplice--a hit man, if that is the correct Twentieth-Century jargon.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek frowned. His plump face puckered and looked pained. He said, \ldblquote You know, madness must be catching. I\rquote m actually beginning to consider the insane notion you\rquote ve brought here. Fortunately, it doesn\rquote t hold water. After all, why would an assassination of the human-Winkler be arranged in public? All the arguments against destroying the robot in public hold against the killing of a human President in public. Don\rquote t you see that ruins the whole theory?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It does not--\rdblquote  began Edwards. \ldblquote It \i does. \i0 No one except for a few officials knew that the mechanical device existed at all. If President Winkler were killed privately and his body disposed of, the robot could easily take over without suspicion--without having roused yours, for instance.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote There would always be a few officials who would know, Mr. Janek. The assassinations would have to broaden.\rdblquote  Edwards leaned forward earnestly. \ldblquote See here, ordinarily there couldn\rquote t have been any danger of confusing the human being and the machine. I imagine the robot wasn\rquote t in constant use, but was pulled out only for specific purposes, and there would always be key individuals, perhaps quite a number of them, who would know where the President was and what he was doing. If that were so, the assassination would have to be carried out at a time when those officials actually thought the President was really the robot.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I don\rquote t follow you.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote See here. One of the robot\rquote s tasks was to shake hands with the crowd; press the flesh. When this was taking place, the officials in the know would be perfectly aware that the hand shaker was, in truth, the robot.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Exactly. You\rquote re making sense now. It \i was \i0 the robot.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Except that it was the Tercentenary, and except that President Winkler could not resist. I suppose it would be more than human to expect a President--particularly an empty crowd pleaser and applause hunter like Winkler--to give up the adulation of the crowd on this day of all days, and let it go to a machine. And perhaps the robot carefully nurtured this impulse so that on this one Tercentenary day, the President would have ordered the robot to remain behind the podium, while he himself went out to shake hands and to be cheered.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Secretly?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Of course secretly. If the President had told anyone in the Service, or any of his aides, or you, would he have been allowed to do it? The official attitude concerning the possibility of assassination has been practically a disease since the events of the late Twentieth Century. So with the encouragement of an obviously clever robot--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You assume the robot to be clever because you assume he is now serving as President. That is circular reasoning. If he is not President, there is no reason to think he is clever, or that he were capable of working out this plot. Besides, what motive could possibly drive a robot to plot an assassination? Even if it didn\rquote t kill the President directly, the taking of a human life indirectly is also forbidden by the First Law, which states: \lquote A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm.\rquote\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said, \ldblquote The First Law is not absolute. What if harming a human being saves the lives of two others, or three others, or even three billion others? The robot may have thought that saving the Federation took precedence over the saving of one life. It was no ordinary robot, after all. It was designed to duplicate the properties of the President closely enough to deceive anyone. Suppose it had the understanding of President Winkler, without his weaknesses, and suppose it knew that it could save the Federation where the President could not.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You can reason so, but how do you know a mechanical device would?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote It is the only way to explain what happened.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote I think it is a paranoid fantasy.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said, \ldblquote Then tell me why the object that was destroyed was powdered into atoms. What else would make sense than to suppose that that was the only way to hide the fact that it was a human being and not a robot that was destroyed? Give me an alternate explanation.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek reddened. \ldblquote I won\rquote t accept it.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote But you can prove the whole matter--or disprove it. It\rquote s why I have come to you--to \i you.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\i0\ldblquote How can I prove it? Or disprove it either?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No one sees the President at unguarded moments as you do. It is with you--in default of family--that he is most informal. Study him.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I have. I tell you he isn\rquote t--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote You haven\rquote t. You suspected nothing wrong--Little signs meant nothing to you. Study him now, being aware that he \i might \i0 be a robot, and you will see.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek said sardonically, \ldblquote I can knock him down and probe for metal with an ultrasonic detector. Even an android has a platinum-iridium brain.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No drastic action will be necessary. Just observe him and you will see that he is so radically not the man he was that he cannot be a man.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek looked at the clock-calendar on the wall. He said, \ldblquote We have been here over an hour.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote m sorry to have taken up so much of your time, but you see the importance of all this, I hope.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Importance?\rdblquote  said Janek. Then he looked up and what had seemed a despondent air turned suddenly into something of hope. \ldblquote But is it, in fact, important? Really, I mean?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote How can it not be important? To have a robot as President of the United States? That\rquote s not important?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No, that\rquote s not what I mean. Forget what President Winkler might be. Just consider this. Someone serving as President of the United States has saved the Federation; he has held it together and, at the present moment, he runs the Council in the interests of peace and of constructive compromise. You\rquote ll admit all that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards said, \ldblquote Of course, I admit all that. But what of the precedent established? A robot in the White House for a very good reason now may lead to a robot in the White House twenty years from now for a very bad reason, and then to robots in the White House for no reason at all but only as a matter of course. Don\rquote t you see the importance of muffling a possible trumpet call for the end of humanity at the time of its first uncertain note?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek shrugged. \ldblquote Suppose I find out he\rquote s a robot? Do we broadcast it to all the world? Do you know how that will affect the Federation? Do you know what it will do to the world\rquote s financial structure? Do you know--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I do know. That is why I have come to you privately, instead of trying to make it public. It is up to you to check out the matter and come to a definite conclusion. It is up to you, next, having found the supposed President to be a robot, which I am certain you will do, to persuade him to resign.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And by your version of his reaction to the First Law, he will then have me killed since I will be threatening his expert handling of the greatest global crisis of the Twenty-first Century.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards shook his head. \ldblquote The robot acted in secret before, and no one tried to counter the arguments he used with himself. You will be able to reinforce a stricter interpretation of the First Law with your arguments. If necessary, we can get the aid of some official from U. S. Robots and Mechanical Men Corporation who constructed the robot in the first place. Once he resigns, the Vice-President will succeed. If the robot-Winkler has put the old world on the right track, good; it can now be kept on the right track by the Vice-President, who is a decent and honorable woman. But we can\rquote t have a robot ruler, and we mustn\rquote t ever again. \par
\tab\ldblquote What if the President is human?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote I\rquote ll leave that to you. You will know.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Janek said, \ldblquote I am not that confident of myself. What if I can\rquote t decide? If I can\rquote t bring myself to? If I don\rquote t dare to? What are your plans?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Edwards looked tired. \ldblquote I don\rquote t know. I may have to go to U. S. Robots. But I don\rquote t think it will come to that. I\rquote m quite confident that now that I\rquote ve laid the problem in your lap, you won\rquote t rest till it\rquote s settled. Do \i you \i0 want to be ruled by a robot?\rdblquote  \par
\tab He stood up, and Janek let him go. They did not shake hands. \par
\tab Janek sat there in the gathering twilight in deep shock. A robot! \par
\tab The man had walked in and had argued, in perfectly rational manner, that the President of the United States was a robot. \par
\tab It should have been easy to fight that off. Yet though Janek had tried every argument he could think of, they had all been useless, and the man had not been shaken in the least. \par
\tab A robot as President! Edwards had been \i certain \i0 of it, and he would \i stay \i0 certain of it. And if Janek insisted that the President was human, Edwards would go to U. S. Robots. He wouldn\rquote t rest. \par
\tab Janek frowned as he thought of the twenty-seven months since the Tercentenary and of how well all had gone in the face of the probabilities. And now? \par
\tab He remained lost in somber thought. \par
\tab He still had the disintegrator but surely it would not be necessary to use it on a human being, the nature of whose body was not in question. A silent laser stroke in some lonely spot would do. \par
\tab It had been hard to maneuver the President into the earlier job, but in this present case, it wouldn\rquote t even have to know. \par
\tab\par
\par
My first thought was to call the previous story \ldblquote Death at the Tricentennial,\rdblquote  but the dictionary assured me that \ldblquote tercentenary\rdblquote  was a perfectly good way of referring to a three hundredth birthday, so I called it \ldblquote Death at the Tercentenary.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Fred changed that name to THE TERCENTENARY INCIDENT, which was a great improvement in my opinion, and I adopted it with glad cries. I am not always pleased with his title changes and generally say so, as in my collection of mystery short stories \i Tales of the Black Widowers. \i0 It is only fair now that I give him credit for a good change. \par
\tab --One more thing. Again, this story represents a return to a theme I handled in an earlier story .The earlier story in this case was EVIDENCE, first published in 1946, thirty years before this story was. There is, except for theme, no similarity between the two stories, and I leave it to the Gentle Reader, if he or she has read both, to decide whether I have improved or not in the interval. (Don\rquote t write, however, unless you think I have improved.) \par
\par
\par
Time flies. I myself am ever-youthful, but everything else is getting older. Do you realize that with the April 1976 issue, \i Amazing Stories, \i0 the oldest of the science fiction magazines, celebrated its Semicentennial? \par
\tab The April 1926 issue of \i Amazing Stories \i0 was Volume I, Number 1. It was the very first issue of the first magazine ever to be devoted entirely to science fiction-and that was fifty years ago. \par
\tab Hugo Gernsback had been born in Luxemburg in 1884 and had emigrated to the United States in 1904. He went on to write some excruciatingly bad science fiction with some excruciatingly good predictions in it, to edit a magazine, in which he included science fiction stories (or scientifiction, as be called it) , and to begin thinking of publishing an all-science-fiction magazine for some time. A probing circular be sent out in 1924 brought in disappointing results, but then, in 1926, without any advance fanfare at all, he placed the new magazine on the stands. \par
\tab Sol Cohen, the current publisher of the magazine, called me in the fall of 1975 to ask me if I could make some contribution in honor of the fiftieth anniversary of the magazine, and although, as usual, I was drowning in commitments, there was no way I could let that pass. On November 22, 1975, I sat down to write BIRTH OF A NOTION and so I was represented in the anniversary issue. \par
\b\par
\par
\pard\keepn\s1\sb240\sa60\kerning32\f1\fs32 Birth of a Notion \par
\pard\kerning0\f0\fs20\par
\tab\b0 That the first inventor of a workable time machine was a science fiction enthusiast is by no means a coincidence. It was inevitable. Why else should an otherwise sane physicist even dare track down the various out-of -the-way theories that seemed to point toward maneuverability in time in the very teeth of General Relativity? \par
\tab It took energy, of course. Everything takes energy. But Simeon Weill was prepared to pay the price. Anything (well, almost anything) to make his hidden science-fictional dream come true. \par
\tab The trouble was that there was no way of controlling either the direction or distance through which one was chronologically thrust. It was all the result of random temporal collisions of the harnessed tachyons. Weill could make mice and even rabbits disappear--but future or past, he couldn\rquote t say. One mouse reappeared, so he must have traveled but a short way into the past--and it seemed quite unharmed. The others? Who could tell? \par
\tab He devised an automatic release for the machine. Theoretically, it would reverse the push (whatever the push might be) and bring back the object (from whichever direction and whatever distance it had gone). It didn\rquote t always work, but five rabbits were brought back unharmed. \par
\tab If he could only make the release foolproof, Weill would have tried it himself. He was \i dying \i0 to try it--which was not the proper reaction of a theoretical physicist, but-was the absolute predictable emotion of a crazed s.f. fan who was particularly fond of the space-operish productions of some decades before the present year of 1976. \par
\tab It was inevitable, then, that the accident should happen. On no account would he have stepped between the tempodes with conscious determination. He knew the chances were about two in five he would not return. On the other hand, he was \i dying \i0 to try it, so he tripped over his own big feet and went staggering between those tempodes as a result of total accident. ...But are there really accidents? \par
\tab He might have been hurled into the past or into the future. As 1t happened, he was ,hurled into the past. \par
\tab He might have been hurled uncounted thousands of years into the past or one and a half days. As it happened, he was hurled fifty-one years into the past to a time when the Teapot Dome Scandal was burning brightly but the nation was keeping Cool with Coolidge and knew that nobody in the world could lick Jack Dempsey. \par
\tab But there was something that his theories didn\rquote t tell Weill. He knew what could happen to the particles themselves, but there was no way of predicting what would happen to the relationships between the various particles. And where are relationships more complex than in the brain? \par
\tab So what happened was that as Weill moved backward through time, his mind unreeled. Not all the way, fortunately, since Weill had not yet been conceived in the year before America\rquote s Sesquicentennial, and a brain with less than no development would have been a distinct handicap. \par
\tab It unreeled haltingly, and partially, and clumsily, and when Weill found himself on a park bench not far from his 1976 home in lower Manhattan, where he experimented in dubious symbiosis with New York University, he found himself in the year 1925 with an abysmally aching head and no very clear idea as to what anything was all about. \par
\tab He found himself staring at a man of about forty, hair slicked down, cheekbones prominent, beaky nose, who was sharing the same bench with him. \par
\tab The man looked concerned. He said, \ldblquote Where did you come from? You were not here a moment ago.\rdblquote  He had a distinct Teutonic accent. . \par
\tab Weill wasn\rquote t sure. He couldn\rquote t remember. But one phrase seemed to stick through the chaos within his skull even though he wasn\rquote t sure what it meant. \par
\tab\ldblquote Time machine,\rdblquote  he gasped. \par
\tab The other man stiffened. He said, \ldblquote Do you read pseudoscientific romances?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What?\rdblquote  said Weill. \par
\tab\ldblquote Have you read H. G. Wells\rquote s \i The Time Machine?\rdblquote\par
\i0\tab  The repetition of the phrase seemed to soothe Weill a bit. The pain in his head lessened. The name Wells seemed familiar, or was that his own name? No. his own name was Weill. \par
\i\tab\i0\ldblquote Wells?\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote I am Weill.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The other man thrust out a hand. \ldblquote I am Hugo Gernsback. I write pseudo-scientific romances at times, but of course, it is not right to say \lquote pseudo.\rquote  That makes it seem there is something fake about it. That is not so. It should be properly written and then it will be scientific fiction. I like to shorten that\rdblquote -his dark eyes gleamed--\rdblquote to scientifiction. \ldblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Yes,\rdblquote  said Weill, trying desperately to collect shattered memories and unwound experiences and getting only moods and impressions. \ldblquote Scientifiction. Better than pseudo. Still not quite--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote If done \i well. \i0 Have you read my \lquote Ralph 124C41 +\rquote ?\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Hugo Gernsback,\rdblquote  said Weill, frowning, \ldblquote Famous--\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote In a small way,\rdblquote  said the other, nodding his head. \ldblquote I have been publishing magazines on radio and on electrical inventions for years. Have you read \lquote Science and Invention\rquote ?\rdblquote\par
\tab Weill caught the word \ldblquote invention\rdblquote  and somehow that left him on the edge of understanding what he had meant by \ldblquote time machine.\rdblquote  He grew eager and said, \ldblquote Yes, yes.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote And what do you think of the scientifiction that I add in each issuer\rquote  \par
\tab Scientifiction again. The word had a soothing effect on him and yet it was not quite right. Something more--Not quite--\par
\tab He said it, \ldblquote Something more. Not quite--\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Not quite enough? Yes, I\rquote ve been thinking that. Last year I sent out circulars asking for subscriptions to a magazine to contain nothing but scientifiction. I would call it \i Scientifiction. \i0 The results were very disappointing. How would you explain that?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Weill didn\rquote t hear him. He was still concentrating on the word \ldblquote scientifiction,\rdblquote  which didn\rquote t seem quite right, but he couldn\rquote t understand why it didn\rquote t. \par
\tab He said, \ldblquote The name is not right.\rdblquote\par
\tab\ldblquote Not right for a magazine? Maybe that\rquote s so. I have not thought of a good name; something to catch the eye, to get across just what the reader will get, and what he will want. That is it. If I could get a good name I would start the magazine and not worry about circulars. I would not ask anything. I would simply put it on every newsstand in the United States next spring; that is all.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Weill stared at him blankly. \par
\tab The man said, \ldblquote Of course, the stories I want should teach science even as they amuse and excite the reader. They should open to him the vast scope of the future. Airplanes will cross the Atlantic nonstop.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Airplanes?\rdblquote  Weill caught a fugitive vision of a large metal whale, rising on its own exhaust. A moment, and it was gone. He said, \ldblquote Large ones, carrying hundreds of people faster than sound.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Of course. Why not? Staying in touch at all times by radio.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Satellites.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote What?\rdblquote  It was the other man\rquote s turn to look puzzled. \par
\tab\ldblquote Radio waves bounce off an artificial satellite in space.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The other man nodded vigorously. \ldblquote I predicted the use of radio waves to detect at a distance in \lquote Ralph 124C41 + .\rquote  Space mirrors? I\rquote ve predicted that. And television, of course. And energy from the atom.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Weill was galvanized. Images flashed before his mind\rquote s eye in no suitable order. \ldblquote Atom,\rdblquote  he said, \ldblquote Yes. Nuclear bombs.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Radium,\rdblquote  said the other man complacently. \par
\tab\ldblquote Plutonium,\rdblquote  said Weill. \par
\tab\ldblquote What?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Plutonium. And nuclear fusion. Imitating the Sun. Nylon and plastics. Pesticides to kill the insects. Computers to kill the problems.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Computers? You mean robots?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Pocket computers,\rdblquote  said Weill enthusiastically. \ldblquote Little things. Hold them in your hand and work out problems. Little radios. Hold them in your hand, too. Cameras take photographs and develop them right in the box. Holographs. Three. dimensional pictures.\rdblquote  \par
\tab The other man said, \ldblquote Do you write scientifiction?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Weill didn\rquote t listen. He kept trying to trap the images. They were growing clearer. \ldblquote Skyscrapers,\rdblquote  he said. \ldblquote Aluminum and glass. Highways. Color television. Man on the Moon. Probes to Jupiter.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote Man on the Moon,\rdblquote  said the other man. \ldblquote Jules Verne. Do you read Jules Verne?\rdblquote  \par
\tab Weill shook his head. It was quite clear now. The mind was healing a bit. \ldblquote Stepping down onto the Moon\rquote s surface on television. Everyone watching. And pictures of Mars. No canals on Mars.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No canals on Mars?\rdblquote  said the other man, astonished. \ldblquote They have been seen.\rdblquote  \par
\tab\ldblquote No canals,\rdblquote  said Weill firmly. \ldblquote Volcanoes. The biggest. Canyons the biggest. Transistors, lasers, tachyons. Trap the tachyons. Make them push against time. Move through time. Move through time. A--ma--\rdblquote  \par
\tab Weill\rquote s voice was fading and his outlines trembled. It so happened that the other man looked away at this moment, staring into the blue sky, and muttering, \ldblquote Tachyons? What is he saying?\rdblquote  \par
\tab He was thinking that if a stranger he met casually in the park was so interested in scientifiction, it might be a good sign that it was time for the magazine. And then he remembered he had no name and dismissed the notion regretfully. \par
\tab He looked back in time to hear Weill\rquote s last words, \ldblquote Tachyonic time travel--an--amazing--stor--y--\rdblquote  And he was gone, snapping back to his own time. \par
\par
\tab Hugo Gernsback stared in horror at the place where the man had been. He hadn\rquote t seen him come and now he really hadn\rquote t seen him go. His mind rejected the actual disappearance. How strange a man-his clothes were oddly cut, come to think of it, and his words were wild and whirling. \par
\tab The stranger himself said it-an amazing story. His last words. \par
\tab And then Gemsback muttered the phrase under his breath, \ldblquote Amazing story. \i ...Amazing Stories?\rdblquote  \par
\tab\i0 A smile tugged at the comers of his mouth. \par
\par
\par
One last word--\par
\tab In putting together the stories for this collection, I couldn\rquote t help noticing that between November 1974 and November 1975, I had written and sold seven science fiction stories. In addition, I had written and sold two mystery stories and one mystery novel, for a total of 132,000 words of fiction. \par
\tab You understand then, why, when some people, blinded by my 120+ books of nonfiction, ask me why I have quit writing fiction, I always answer, \ldblquote I haven\rquote t.\rdblquote  \par
\tab Well, I \i haven\rquote t! \par
\tab\i0 And while I live, I won\rquote t! \par
\par
\par
\f3\par
}
 